From April 1 2019, work experience will no longer be a requirement for recruitment for entry level jobs in the public sector. The department of public service and administration said on Monday that the initiative was part of the government’s efforts to address the country’s high youth unemployment rate. The department was currently in the process of amending regulations in this regard that will take effect at the commencement of the 2019/2020 financial year. Minister Ayanda Dlodlo said the initiative would enhance the government’s human resource development capacity, which would hopefully see the high levels of unemployment, especially among the youth, alleviated. The process would also see the removal of unnecessary barriers to entry into the public service and provision of a platform for new graduates to acquire the required experience in their life long career paths. It would also ensure that new and innovative blood was attracted to the public service. Dlodlo said the changes would not do away with the inherent requirements of professional fields. “This exercise will be structured in such a way that it does not compromise the professional and technical requirements for various fields. All we want to do is streamline career paths and align skills, which will make the public service fit for purpose.” Department spokesperson Mava Scott said the focus of recruitment would be on minimum academic qualifications obtained from appropriately registered training institutions in terms of the National Qualifications Framework Act and the pre-employment verification, as specified in the Public Service Regulations of 2016. Dlodlo instructed the department to issue a circular to the public service mandating heads of departments in national and provincial spheres of government to ensure a state of readiness towards a phased implementation by April 1. Meanwhile, a paperless administration across the public service and an e-recruitment system would be rolled from next month. “We are concerned that we took a long time to evolve ... resulting in young people, who mostly are techno savvy, enduring the burden of incurring unnecessary costs when applying for positions in the public service. The world has moved on and the public service needs to keep up and embrace the digital age in all its processes,” said Dlodlo. The minister instructed the department to introduce a digital Z83 application form as an additional platform for job seekers in the public service. Processes will be put in place to ensure compliance with the Public Service Act by formally introducing the digital Z83 form through notice in the Government Gazette. The decision to create a digital Z83 form, Scott said, was a direct response to job seekers in South Africa, who have used various platforms, including social media, to inform the minister about how cumbersome and unaffordable the paper Z83 application process is. “The minister has heard the voices of young people too and is committed to use innovative technologies to ensure that being poor does not become a barrier to employment in the public service.” Applications for jobs in the public service will still be accepted through the Z83 forms to accommodate those who do not have access to the internet. “We understand the challenge of internet access for some of our communities, especially in the rural areas, so we will not close anyone out through this e-recruitment process,” Scott explained. The department said it will be engaging local government authorities to expedite the infrastructure rollout for wi-fi hot spots across all municipalities. – SAnews.gov.za