Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan took the opportunity during day two of his testimony before the state capture commission on Tuesday to address his detractors, the Economic Freedom Fighters and Black First Land First, directly. On Monday, while Gordhan was giving his long awaited testimony, EFF deputy president Floyd Shivambu and spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi addressed EFF members picketing outside the commission’s venue in Parktown. Shivambu claimed that Gordhan was a “major part” of state capture and that he got the role of finance minister by blackmailing former president Jacob Zuma with the spy tapes in 2009. Gordhan said contrary to the two parties’ beliefs, being minister was to him “a calling” and not a business. “I have never been party to state capture as those outside this forum would like to have you believe. I have never been manipulated by anyone [in order to do them any favours] or manipulated anyone myself for my own gain,” said Gordhan. The minister said those making noise outside the commission venue should make such allegations before the state capture commission under oath “and subject themselves to cross examination”. During his testimony on Tuesday, Gordhan said he had never been part of state capture, and has never considered politics as a business from which he sought to gain money. “I come from humble beginnings. I remember earning R100 from a job I used to have. I am not a commodity for sale and the Guptas also learnt that,” said Gordhan. His testimony took the slight detour to address allegations made by the EFF and BLF, who again gathered outside the commission’s Parktown venue on Tuesday. Continuing with his testimony for the day, Gordhan mainly focused on the events that took place on December 9 2015, when then finance minister Nhlanhla Nene was fired. He described the uncertainty that surrounded the firing as having been the cause of serious financial turmoil following the rand’s fall in value. “The estimated cost to South Africa in market value was about R500 billion,” explained Gordhan. He said the impact for working class people was felt “in the substantial decline in value of shares and value of pensions” as indicated by the Public Investment Cooperation drop in value – it lost about R50 billion during this point. Gordhan revealed that on that Sunday, December 13 2015, he was informed that then president Jacob Zuma wished to meet with him. “On the same day, Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa and [ANC deputy secretary-general] Jessie Duarte contacted me and said the president is going to request something of you, please do not refuse,” said Gordhan. He said he was unsure why he was chosen after being fired in 2014 from the same position. “There were other qualified candidates such as Trevor Manuel – who at some point was the longest serving finance minister in the world – and Mcebisi Jonas, who was at the time deputy finance minister and knew the happenings at the ministry,” said Gordhan. The now public enterprises minister then detailed the state of affairs at treasury and the challenges he had to deal with.    