A BEE deal has degenerated into outright war with German chemicals group Lanxess trying to force the 26% shareholder in its chrome mine in Rustenburg to get lost for R352.36. This “forced sale” was successfully interdicted in court last week and Lanxess will now go to arbitration with its BEE partner Dirlem. Letters included in the court papers show how the relationship has broken down, with accusations of fronting and tokenism from one side met by accusations of sabotage and imagined slights from the other. The BEE partner Dirlem is 49% owned by the mine’s workers and 51% owned by Direng Investment Holdings. In turn, the workers and Direng own 26% of Lanxess Chrome Mining (LCM). Dirlem’s representative on the LCM board, Kenny Setzin, has accused Lanxess of undermining his participation in decisions and of questionable financial engineering that ensures all value from the mine flows straight to the parent company. Setzin founded Direng Investment Holdings and is CEO of the BEE investment company. Things came to a head in August when Setzin raised his concerns with a BEE verification agency. This in turn jeopardised LCM’s BEE rating and an important contract with Transnet. Earlier this month, Lanxess wrote to Dirlem, saying that it was enforcing a clause in their 2012 agreement that permits it to force a sale of the 26% BEE stake back to the company because the agreement has allegedly been breached. Dirlem’s alleged breach was that it failed “to do everything in its power to promote and maintain the interests” of LCM by jeopardising the BEE rating. A major issue raised by Setzin was the enormous intercompany loan that dominates LCM’s balance sheet. City Press has seen the company’s financial statements for last year. The mine has no equity on its balance sheet and is instead entirely funded through a shareholder loan from the parent company. This is why the attempted forced sale was for a nominal amount – the mine’s book value really is zero. On the face of it, this looks like a practice called “thin capitalisation”, which can be abused to shift profits out of a company into its parent company. This is a well-known mechanism to evade tax or evade having profits accrue to minority shareholders. It could, however, also simply be the result of bona fide debt funding to support a struggling subsidiary, which is what Lanxess says it is. However, the effect is that LCM paid its parent company R88 million in interest as well as R100 million in capital on the loan last year. The result was that its entire profit for the year of R98 million went into the loan. The outstanding balance was R820 million, meaning it is unlikely there will be any dividends for the remaining life of the mine. In addition to the loan, the mine’s finances are intricately entangled with the parent company through charges for administration and marketing that came to R40 million in the year. These and other complaints were spelt out in a long letter Setzin addressed to the chair of Lanxess and LCM, Luis López-Remón, in April. After the BEE verification incident, López-Remón laid into Setzin in an equally long reply. “A feature of your directorship has been to consistently seek fault and grounds on which to criticise your co-directors ... but with very limited input and contribution by you,” he wrote. López-Remón also said that Dirlem “has to date derived very substantial benefit and reward”. The BEE partners have received a total of R20 million in special trickle dividends. The BEE deal was initially structured along the same lines as most vendor-financed deals in the mining industry. The BEE partner bought 26% using a loan from the company itself. The BEE partner then pays off the loan using its dividends. This initial 2007 agreement was changed after the second Mining Charter came into effect in 2010 and included a new requirement that BEE partners at least receive some part of their dividends. This new deal in 2012 included a guaranteed dividend of R5 million a year and that the outstanding debt on the vendor finance loan would expire in June last year. The BEE deal, however, effectively vested in June last year, leaving the BEE partners with a technically worthless shareholding and very little prospect of any future dividends. Workers on the mine, who own 49% of the 26% BEE share, are also demanding answers. Last year, the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) got LCM to pay the 519 workers at the mine a one-off settlement of R10 000 each in lieu of any other realistic benefit from the shares. However, the National Union of Metalworkers of SA (Numsa) has been organising at the mine and questions the NUM’s deal. Numsa organiser Mere Boase claims the union now has 300 members at LCM, making it the majority union. The company has not recognised it as such and told City Press that “a formal verification process has not been concluded yet, but we believe that the NUM is still the majority union at LCM”. Lanxess spokesperson Nomzamo Khanyile told City Press that, over the past two years, “the relationship between Lanxess and its fellow shareholder Dirlem has broken down completely”. She said that most of City Press’ questions could not be answered because of “pending legal proceedings”. TALK TO US Do you think government should be more actively involved to prevent this kind of deal? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword CHROME and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material