Just when South Africa’s business world hoped the era of family, friends and favours for doing business was drawing to an end, we get a case of Déjà vu. Has Duduzane’s father been replaced by Andile’s father? A mere change of the guard at the trough? The Bosasa campaign donation to Cyril Ramaphosa via his son, and the president’s statement that he was not aware of a R500 000 donation by this company with large contracts with government, unfortunately gives us flashbacks to Duduzane’s father: “I don’t know…” Should Pres Ramabosasa’s denial of any knowledge about this donation be accepted, and also the notion that he is a person with not the faintest interest in detail and quite satisfied to accept that it is “twelve o’clock and all’s well…”. It is the third time in a year that he has denied any knowledge of wrongdoings at the time of the events and for a very long time afterwards. In baseball, it would have been the dreaded strike three and out. But this is South African politics. And in a parliamentary system where the ANC as the majority party has accepted as the norm the precedent of a president who answers with an “I don’t know” and thereby dodges the crux of parliamentary questions, it will not be “strike three” for Ramabosasa. The two prominent issues about which Ramaphosa also had denied any knowledge of wrongdoing, deal with: • The massive corruption of state capture, and • The dreadful financial situation of Eskom. Strike 1: Ramaphosa’s “loose nuts” In May 2018 Ramaphosa tells the South African National Editors’ Forum that he only became aware of the full extent of state capture after the first published reports in May 2017 based on leaked Gupta emails. All that had happened before were only minor cases of “a loose wheel nut”. The loose wheel nuts that he noted when serving as deputy president of the country as well as the ANC, included: • August 2014: Nathi Nhleko, minister of police, finds no wrongdoing on the part of Zuma in his investigation into Nkandla aimed at countering the findings of Public Protector Thuli Madonsela and magically transformed a swimming pool and chicken coup and kraal into security features. • September 2014: Anwa Dramat is suspended as head of the Hawks and Berning Ntlemeza appointed as acting head. • November 2014: A parliamentary ad hoc committee finds that Zuma does not have to pay back the money. • December 2014: Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa is assigned to head a task team (also known as the War Room) to ensure the turnaround of Eskom, Transnet and the SA Post Office. Minister of Public Enterprises Lynne Brown appoints a new Eskom board and a new chief executive, Tshediso Matona. • February 2015: The State Security Agency jams cellphone signals during the opening of Parliament. This executive raping of Parliament was later blamed on officials and Ramaphosa did his deal to exonerate the administration. • March 2015: Matona is removed and Brian Molefe is brought in from Transnet. It is uncertain whether this was decided by Zuma, by the Eskom Board or the minister of public enterprises in accordance with or by trampling the fiduciary duties of the directors and the constitutional accountability of the relevant minister. • July 2015: Eskom begins to assist the Guptas to obtain Optimum coal mine. • September 2015: Mosebenzi Zwane is plucked from obscurity as minister of economic affairs in the Free State to become minister of mineral resources. • November 2015: Zwane travels to Switzerland to arm-wrestle Glencore into selling Optimum to the Guptas. • December 2015: Nhlanhla Nene is fired as minister of finance and replaced by Des van Rooyen who immediately pitches up with Gupta advisers at Treasury. A plunging rand and strong interference by the financial institutions results in Van Rooyen being replaced by Pravin Gordhan. • March 2016: The Constitutional Court finds Zuma broke his oath of office and that Parliament did not fulfil its task to keep the executive to account. • March 2016: Deputy Minister of Finance Mcebisi Jonas and Themba Maseko (former Cabinet spokesperson) make claims about the Guptas’ involvement in Cabinet appointments and government contracts. • April 2016: Eskom authorises a payment of more than R600 million to the Gutpas’ Tegeta to help the purchase of Optimum. • May 2016: Gordhan appeals through an extra-ordinary statement the public to assist with protecting National Treasury and its staff against an undermining onslaught. • October 2016: Zuma dodges Madonsela’s attempts to get answers to question in order to finalise her state capture report. • November 2016: Madonsela’s state capture report is released. The ANC welcomes the report as a basis for further scrutiny. Derek Hanekom tables a motion of no confidence in Zuma at a national executive committee meeting of the ANC. • March 2017: Zuma fires Gordhan and Mcebisi and replaces them with Malusi Gigaba and Sfiso Buthelezi at Treasury. All the preceding events Ramaphosa considered to be “just that”: loose wheel nuts. • May 2017: The first reports on the leaked Gupta-emails appear and Ramaphosa smells a rat… Strike 2: When the penny drops… a hearing-impaired Ramaphosa? Ramaphosa, assigned to oversee the turnaround of Eskom and appointed to the War Room, acknowledged this year in Davos (he was still deputy president) just after a new chief executive and board of directors were appointed for Eskom, that he had pressured Zuma into acceding to a new chief executive and board. He said that when at a preparation meeting for Davos he learnt of the extent of the financial crisis Eskom was facing, the penny dropped… Just to add, as an afterthought: “the penny had dropped some while ago, but that’s (when preparing for Davos and hearing about the cash flow crisis Eskom was facing) when we heard it”. The Eskom War Room under the auspices of Ramaphosa was either responsible or must have at least been aware of the flouting of corporate governance rules regarding the board of directors, the chief executive, the minister of public works, the president himself and the deputy president for: • Bringing in Brian Molefe from Transnet to act as Eskom’s chief executive. • The sudden sale of the Optimum Mine by Glencore to the Guptas’ Tegeta resources with a renewed coal supply contract at a much higher coal price than what was the case when the mine was still Glencore’s; • The upfront payment of R586 million for undelivered coal to Tegeta in March 2016. • Eskom’s declining profitability and increasing debt burden. Only in August 2016 Zuma re-asserted control over Eskom, sidelining Ramaphosa by assuming the chairmanship of a coordinating committee to oversee all state-owned enterprises. That came after Gordhan who was appointed at Treasury after Des van Rooyen’s weekend outing to the Treasury, called for drastic restructuring of state-owned enterprises and the need for better management and oversight. Either Ramaphosa was aware of these developments and as head of the War Room comfortable with that, or he was a very absent War Room manager. On his claim that the Eskom financial crisis only dawned in all its ugliness in January 2018 when preparing for Davos, one can only wonder why ordinary South Africans were aware of reports like Eskom’s 2017 report that stated: “There is no doubt that the financial challenges faced by Eskom require ongoing close attention from the shareholder and in terms of legislative oversight. These challenges are complex. There are no easy fixes.” Granted, it is difficult to hear when a penny drops into a long-drop pit latrine like Eskom. But if his hearing is impaired, could he not detect the smell? Or did the lure of becoming president work as a signal-blocking device preventing him from hearing, seeing or smelling any wrongdoing. The difficulty with these timelines If Ramaphosa is to be trusted that he really did not know of or note anything wrong in these three instances until: the wheels fell off with the publishing of the Gupta-leaks, he heard the penny that had dropped a long time before, and he realised a year after the fact who were financing his campaign, then he must be ranked as the most absent-minded disinterested and unobservant deputy-president the country has ever had. It unfortunately also raises the question whether such an unobservant and absent-minded hand on the governmental ship’s wheel offers the kind of leadership for the turnaround South Africa has been waiting for. But there is another recorded time line… In December 2017 after his election as ANC President, Ferial Haffajee and Pieter du Toit reported: “The dramatic firing of Nhlanhla Nene as minister of finance on December 9, 2015, a little more than two years ago, was the moment when Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa realised that he could no longer support the status quo.” Based on information from key figures of the CR17 campaign, they mention the need for him to avoid a dismissal as deputy president. This was indeed a strange strategy, since Zuma’s campaign for ANC leadership was fuelled by playing the victim role after being asked to step down by Thabo Mbeki. With the growing anti-Zuma sentiment in the ANC gradually catching up with the gatvol-ness of ordinary South Africans, being dismissed by a controversial and tainted president would have secured a sympathy tsunami… And it raises the question whether it was the Nene firing or the Gupta emails that was the Damascus Road experience for Ramaphosa that led him to see what so many others – including the Constitutional Court – had seen well before. Investors that South Africa so desperately need, should know whether it is an era of entrepreneurial finesse that will work, or merely a case of new family, friends and favours. • Johannes Wessels is the founder of the Enterprise Observatory of SA, a research company exploring entrepreneurial space. He is closer to the market than to Marx, loves his red wine and cannot start the day without coffee and news sites. This is an abridged version of an article that appeared here.