A bromance was brewing between President Cyril Ramaphosa and European Council President Donald Tusk at the SA-EU Summit last week. Ramaphosa described Tusk as “my good friend” and Tusk returned the compliment, saying: “Our talks today demonstrate that from climate change and migration to trade and investment and security, we could develop an even stronger partnership which can be a powerful example to the rest of the world. “And I must tell you that under your leadership, Mr President, you can make it happen,” he said with a drawn-out emphasis on the word “your”. It was the first SA-EU Summit in five years, which European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker described at a briefing afterwards as a “very big mistake”. “I do not hope that the next summit between South Africa and Europe will take another five years. "I do not know who was responsible for this, but as I am responsible for the African region, it must have been me. But the next summit will take place next Friday,” he said to peals of laughter. “It must take place at least in the next two years. South Africa is very important.” The European Commission building in Brussels was fizzing with excitement this week, with one senior diplomat speaking of a “total reboot” of the special relationship between the EU and South Africa, the only African country with which it enjoys a special relationship. Other senior officials spoke of a sea change in the relationship between the two sides, from an “ideological” one in which EU member states were regarded with suspicion as former colonial masters and agents of white monopoly capital, to a more pragmatic one in which business could be done. On the reboot, Ramaphosa appeared to agree. “This summit has really been a moment of renewing our bonds as South Africa with the EU, and of developing a foundation for a much more effective way of dealing with each other and discussing a range of issues, such as accelerating investment and also focusing on issues like climate change, human rights and a whole range of other issues,” he said. The preceding period under former president Jacob Zuma was characterised by “disengagement”, said a senior EU official. The moment the two sides disagreed, South African officials no longer wanted to engage. It took months to secure even lower-level meetings. However, the South Africans said the failure to hold a summit was “from the EU side”. This, said a senior diplomat, was the result of a clash of values and of South Africa thinking it was being unfairly treated by the EU. Another difference, perhaps, from the Zuma administration was the accommodation of the entire South African delegation, from Ramaphosa to the spokespeople, in a four-star hotel. Last Thursday afternoon, in an interview, Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies said: “What people are seeing now is a boost in investor confidence and a warming to what they hear from President Ramaphosa.” The trip to the EU, he said, “was largely around investment issues” and the need to “ignite” economic growth. But it may be a while before South Africans get to witness the effects of the billions of rands in investment coming our way. “Some of these [investments] will be mulled over for some time, but what has happened since the president’s initiative is that there is greater confidence building up, and a number of decisions have been taken which take us over a line,” Davies said. He said that among the factors contributing to improved investor confidence was the sense that “things that were wrong are being put right”. Among the wrongs Davies mentioned were state capture and policy uncertainty, be it about the broadband spectrum rollout or the mining industry or renewable energy. “A lot of these things have now been solved and people have got a sense that there is a conscious effort to work and improve the investment climate. "It has been the basis on which people have been willing to come to the party, and that augurs quite well and gives us an initial boost as we move forward.” Davies said that while the commitments made at the investment summit would take place within the next few years, “some of those will be projects that will be happening fairly soon”. But with South Africa drumming up investment from diverse blocs, including the EU, Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) and others, does it have to make hard choices about whom to do business with? “Our aim is not to,” Davies said. “We value the fact that there is more than one potential investment and trade partner. The fact that there is a diversity of interest in the African continent is a good thing for us. “We try to work with investment partners around the same issues. We try as much as we can for a relationship that is mutually beneficial, not one where we are supplicants.” Regarding Brexit, a deal for which was decided in the British Parliament this week, Davies said South Africa “has a framework in place that will also enable us to ride through the challenges”. “Whatever the Brexit is, we will ensure that we don’t find ourselves prejudiced inordinately. There will be issues, but we will be able to maintain access for our wines, fruits and [other products],” he said. “Europe remains our largest trading and investment partner. The UK is second. We are working to ensure that whatever they do in the EU, the relationship with us does not disappear. "The biggest investment partner in productive sectors is Germany, followed by the UK, France and Belgium. “Our trade policy priority is Africa and African integration, and to seek mutually beneficial ties with others. We don’t want masters. We want an equitable and developmental approach.” In his address after the summit, Ramaphosa was at pains to explain that the land question – a “deep wound to the hearts of our people” – was not to be a deterrent to investment. “We have always said we must make sure not to damage our economy, negatively affect agricultural production, and food security must always be assured,” he said. “There is no reason for people to be afraid here that there is going to be full-scale expropriation of land. We have said to those investing in our country that they should have no fear that their land or property is going to be expropriated. "In fact, this is going to lead to a process where we will now be able to grow the economy and make sure that security of tenure and property rights will be given to many more South Africans rather than just a few. “For us this is the beginning of a very positive process that will bring stability to South Africa. Because as it is now, South Africa would be on the path of instability if we do not address the land question.” The economy was not the only item on the summit’s agenda however, and the joint communiqué issued afterwards included discussions on everything from migration and climate change, to Iran’s nuclear disarmament and the stockpiling of chemical weapons. South Africa’s history of conflict resolution is especially important to the EU, as is its stint on the UN Security Council starting in 2020. However, trade and investment loomed large. Gules’ trip to Brussels was sponsored by the EU