Convicted racist Vicky Momberg’s case to appeal her conviction has been postponed to February 20 2019. Momberg is currently out on R2000 bail after hurling racist slurs at police officers following a smash and grab incident. She appeared in the Randburg Magistrates’ Court, where she was appealing her conviction and sentencing, on Monday morning . Her lawyer, Kingdom Onah, said her sentence was “harsh”, and called for it to be overturned. Onah said that they were still waiting for the director of public prosecutions to provide them with a date on which the appeal would be heard. The former estate agent was found guilty of four counts of crimen injuria. She was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment‚ once of which was suspended on the condition she was not found guilty of a similar crime within three years. After serving four months of her two-year jail sentence at the Johannesburg Correctional Services Centre‚ more commonly known as ‘Sun City’ prison, she was released in August. Last year the Randburg Equality Court found that Momberg was guilty of hate speech in terms of Section 10 of the Equality Act. It also found that Constable David Mkhondo’s right to dignity had been infringed upon. Mkhondo had assisted Momberg following her being the victim of a smash and grab The incident, in which the K-word was uttered 48 times by Momberg, was caught on video and widely circulated on social media. Mkhondo laid a charge of crimen injuria against Momberg and also lodged a complaint of hate speech with the human rights commission in February 2016. Momberg later admitted in court to making the racist comments, but said that she couldn’t “remember” what she had said. Momberg has previously claimed that when she saw Mkhondo approach her following the smash and grab incident she had felt “intimidated”, because she had been robbed by a black man. In April, Momberg’s then lawyer Kevin Lawlor argued against the authenticity of the video, after Momberg sought to appeal her conviction and sentencing. Magistrate Pravina Rugoonandan said at the time that there was now “a feeble attempt to challenge the state on the authenticity of the recording”.