Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi has lashed out at the “barbaric” attack on three doctors who were shot and robbed of their belongings in Limpopo this week. According to information received, the three doctors were attacked at the doctors’ residences in Letaba Hospital by heavily armed men yesterday morning. The doctors are being treated at the hospital. “This barbaric attack on doctors should be condemned in the strongest terms possible. But more than that, the law enforcement agencies should be mobilised to ensure that those behind the attacks are apprehended and brought to justice. We view the attack on our medical professionals as a declaration of war on the state and the citizens of the republic. We cannot treat this serious violation of the law as just another act of criminality. In this regard, we have escalated the matter to the national minister of police. “Police Minister Bheki Cele, who has just returned from a trip abroad, and I will be visiting the hospital today to get first-hand information about what happened and what should be done to ensure swift action,” Motsoaledi said this morning. The minister said that even during times of war, health professionals and health facilities were spared the violence because both warring parties understood that health professionals were there to save lives and protect the vulnerable. “Even during moments of war health facilities are usually spared from attacks ... this act cannot be viewed as an ordinary act of criminality, but an attack on the state. “We should act with speed and ensure that perpetrators are send to jail,” Motsoaledi added. The South African Medical Association also “strongly condemned” the attack yesterday, saying it again brought the need for increased security at all hospitals in the country into the spotlight. According to media reports the three doctors were shot and injured – one critically and needing surgery. “Doctors need to be safe in their working environment or if they are living on hospital premises. Our colleagues cannot continue to be victims of violent crime and we again call on authorities to ensure all medical facilities – and places of residence – are safe and secure,” said medical association chairperson Dr Angelique Coetzee. Coetzee said it was unacceptable that security at Letaba Hospital was not secure enough to prevent five armed robbers from getting on to the property. “This incident must serve as a wake-up call to all of us to be vigilant and aware all times. But it must also send a message to the authorities that the current levels of security are not strong enough and that something must be done about it. Security at medical facilities simply is non-negotiable,” Coetzee added. According to the national department of health, several incidents of robberies where doctors were targeted had been reported in the past in other hospitals in the province. “The Limpopo Health MEC has been working tirelessly with the police in the province to try to ensure the safety of health professionals in hospitals. However, following the latest brazen attack, the matter had to be elevated to the national ministry of police, as it was becoming clearer that this is not just a common issue of criminality,” the department stated.