Charlton Karuweruwe wanted to be a lawyer one day, but the six-year-old was killed at school last week, stabbed multiple times in the chest allegedly by a 17-year-old Grade 11 pupil from a nearby high school. Charlton’s body was found on the floor of the toilet at Dikeledi Makapan Primary School in Makapanstad, North West, with the knife still lodged in his chest. The knife handle had broken off and was lying on the floor nearby. In an interview with City Press on Friday, Charlton’s aunt, Nothisah Nhongo, said by the time principal Willy Modise arrived at the scene it was too late. “They tried to rush him to hospital, but they were told he had passed on,” she said. Nhongo said they were told that Charlton’s alleged killer slept at a nearby graveyard before making his way to the school on Wednesday, where he sneaked into the toilet. In the morning, when Charlton’s schoolmates went to the toilets, the suspect allegedly asked them to call Charlton. Nhongo said the attacker slapped Charlton’s schoolmate, who ran away crying to call the principal. “He then shut my nephew’s mouth using his hand and started stabbing him in the chest until the knife handle broke off. He cried out for help, but nobody came because the toilets are a bit far,” she said. North West education department spokesperson Freddy Sepeng said a police investigation would establish the motive behind Charlton’s murder. He said authorities learnt that on Tuesday, the day before the murder, the suspect went to Charlton’s school and asked his schoolmates where he was. “He didn’t see him. He told police that because he stays and travels too far when going to school he didn’t go home. He slept at a graveyard and woke up early and went to Charlton’s school and waited in the toilet,” Sepeng said. “The schoolmate who had brought Charlton rushed to Modise’s office to report and when Modise arrived the suspect raised his hands and told him that he has ‘problems’, before lying down and having his hands tied.” Sepeng said the suspect knew Charlton’s family and that his sister arrived at the school shortly after Charlton was stabbed. “She came running to the school. She wanted to know who stabbed Charlton and when she saw the suspect she said: ‘I know him, I know him, it’s my fault. My mom is going to kill me.’ That’s why we think they were involved in a relationship.” But Nhongo dismissed reports suggesting that the suspect was the boyfriend of Charlton’s sister, saying the sister viewed the suspect as a “gay friend”. The sister, who is in the same class as the suspect at Mankala Technical High School, is in fact Nhongo’s daughter, she said. The day before the murder, her daughter told the suspect after school that she was rushing to pick up Charlton from primary school, something she did every day. Nhongo said the family, who arrived in South Africa from Zimbabwe in 2008 in search of a better life, was battling to come to terms with Charlton’s death. “We just don’t know what caused [the suspect] to do it,” she said. The family had high hopes for the little boy. “He was intelligent. He passed all his subjects in the last term and on the day of his death he was going to write his last exam paper. He wanted to be a lawyer one day,” she said. Nhongo said Charlton adored his parents. “He was a quiet person who never raised his voice. We just don’t know what to do. We don’t know how and when he is going to be buried. We need help. We don’t have anything,” she said. “We have not even seen his body. We are told that it is at the state mortuary. We don’t have a funeral parlour.” Sepeng said the department has provided counselling for Charlton’s schoolmates and that North West Education MEC Sello Lehari had appointed a task team to assist with Charlton’s burial in Zimbabwe this week. The suspect appeared at the Temba Magistrates’ Court on Friday on a charge of murder. The case was postponed to Tuesday. TALK TO US Why do you think our kids are becoming more violent at school? What should we be doing about the problem? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword CHARLTON and tell us your views. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material