The days of Hanover Park residents living under siege because of gangsters are numbered, said President Cyril Ramaphosa as he officially launched the police’s Anti-Gang Unit in the Cape Town township on Friday. The president said the reason he, Police Minister Bheki Cele and Premier Helen Zille had gone to the area was to send a strong message to gangsters. “We are here to tell these gangsters that we do not fear them. Their days are numbered as we plan to take back our streets. We will be coming after all of them. “It is time that our women walked the streets without fear; children played in the streets again and were not hindered from attending school,” said Ramaphosa. The president engaged with community members before officially launching the unit, which is made up of members from specialised sectors of the police setup to “dislodge and terminally weaken” the capacity of gangs in the area. Outlining the unit’s strategy, national police commissioner Khehla Sithole said the unit would include a subsection in charge of liaising with the community – the community policing unit – and a cold case unit responsible for reinvestigating cases that have been dormant for some time. “The units will have a visible policing subsection and multidisciplinary investigative units who, working together, should bring about the necessary results in the township,” said Sithole. Ramaphosa also handed over a new fleet of 50 unmarked BMWs to the unit to be used specifically by detectives. He said it was necessary to intensify the fight against gangsterism because “when gang warfare flares it is the innocent who suffer”. He gave the example of 19-year-old Ameerodien Noordien, a volunteer with the Gift of the Givers, who was shot dead last month when he was caught in the middle of a gang battle. Gift of the Givers founder, Dr Imtiaz Sooliman, concurred, and said it was a pity that young Noordien, who was committed to taking care of others such as his ailing mother, had to have his life cut short. He urged community members to also assist in the fight against criminals through sharing whatever information they had with the Anti-Gang Unit. The launch of the unit in the Western Cape came after another tactical task team was set up in Westbury, Johannesburg, following a community outcry after the death of Heather Peterson, a mother of six who was caught in the crossfire between alleged drug dealers. The chairperson of the portfolio committee on police, Francois Beukman, hailed the re-establishment of the anti-gang unit. “The committee has on a number of occasions during the fifth Parliament pushed for the re-establishment of these specialised units, which should be specially trained to deal effectively with changing environments in gang-infested areas. “The committee is of the view that the unit will play a central role in weakening the capacity of gangs to operate and put a halt to activities, such as the production and sale of drugs, while reducing illegal firearms and the high incidence of gang-related murders,” said Beukman. 