An overwhelming sense of national, continental and global loss was expressed at the government’s special official memorial service for former state protocol chief and ambassador, Billy Modise, held at the international relations department in Pretoria. The late struggle stalwart was remembered as a diplomat par excellence and a sharp mind who shaped South Africa’s foreign policy by his colleagues and family on Tuesday. “We want to acknowledge that Uncle Billy [Modise] was one of a galaxy of stars who played a key role in the evolution of our foreign policy under the overall guidance of Oliver Tambo led by Jonny Makhathini [Johnstone Makhathini] and later former president Thabo Mbeki. “This team orchestrated the isolation of apartheid South Africa, its expulsion from the United Nations and the declaration of apartheid as a crime against humanity,” said International Relations Minister Lindiwe Sisulu. READ: Exile taught me to trust whites – Billy Modise South Africa’s ambassador to Austria, Tebogo Seokolo, said Modise was pivotal even after apartheid because he was responsible for the appointment and mentoring of other government officials, including himself. “What Modise identified as urgent and pressing was the development of state protocol polices, the revamp of state protocol facilities, and the need for the recruitment of young and dynamic people. “When Modise retired in 2006 he had accomplished all the goals that he had set himself. More importantly he had recruited a pool of protocol officers fit for duty. Among those recruited was Nonceba Losi-Tutu, who rose through the ranks to become the first female chief of state protocol,” said Seokolo. Modise’s family, represented by his nephew Tshepo Modise, chose to remember him for his love. “My uncle passionately loved his family. He also loved clothes and dressing well, like a true Modise. I would like to thank Aunt Yoli and the ANC for sharing Uncle Billy Modise with the rest of South Africa,” said his nephew. The 87-year-old struggle stalwart died last Wednesday night at the Unitas Hospital in Pretoria following a long illness. Modise is best known for his work in building the anti-apartheid movement in the Nordic countries in the 1960s. He left South Africa during his final year at Fort Hare University in Alice, when the apartheid government introduced the University Extension Bill, which legalised tertiary segregation, forcing students of different races to go to separate universities. After several efforts to protest against the bill came to nought, the Bloemfontein-born Modise accepted a scholarship to Lund University in Sweden. Modise became the ANC’s chief representative in Stockholm, a position he held until the ANC was unbanned in 1990. He was awarded the Order of Luthuli – Silver Class for his contribution to the country’s democracy after spending 30 years outside South Africa and building the anti-apartheid movement in the Nordic countries. President Cyril Ramaphosa granted the former chief of state protocol a special category 1 funeral and he is to be buried on Thursday.   