The Eastern Cape is mourning the death of one of its monarchs, Queen Fikelephi Bongolethu Ndamase of Western Pondoland. Queen Bongolethu, as she was affectionately known, died at Mthatha’s Life St Mary’s Private Hospital from diabetes-related illnesses. She was 56. In a statement on Thursday afternoon, the ANC said that Queen Bongolethu, the mother of current Western Phondoland king Ndamase Ndamase, had been admitted to the hospital on June 6, for observations and routine tests related to diabetes. Queen Bongolethu had acted as regent of the nation from 1997 while her son, the current king, was busy with his studies. He later ascended to the throne in 2008. The queen is the daughter of late king Sobhuza II of eSwatini who was married to Nkosi Mabalengwe Ndamase, the late father to the current king. “While we mourn her loss, we must thank her most profoundly for her generosity of spirit and teaching the nation humility, respect for human dignity and compassion for the weak, the poor and the downtrodden,” Lulama Ngcukayithobi, the ANC provincial secretary, said in a statement on Thursday. Family spokesperson Prince Mlamli Ndamase could not be reached for comment at the time of writing. A family member with intimate knowledge of the situation said the queen had not been well for a while. Senior AbaThembu leader, Nkosi Dumisani Mgudlwa, said Queen Bongolethu would be remembered for her kindness, self respect and for being principled. “She was very quiet and coming from the eSwatini royal family she has been trained to love and to be close to her people. She was the mother of her nation and we never heard anything bad about her. As AbaThembu we are with the AmaMpondo aseNyandeni during this difficult time. We wish them strength and comfort,” he said. Prince Abongile Ngozi, spokesperson for the Congress of Traditional Leaders of South Africa’s Youth Wing, said the queen should be remembered for holding the fort when her son, Ndamase, was too young and busy with his studies to take the reins himself and for doing so diligently. “She was a mother to all. She never embarrassed the nation but instead united it and made sure it was stronger. We are shocked and saddened by the death of the queen and hope that AmaMpondo aseNyandeni will get through this painful period and remember the queen for all the good she has done,” said Ngozi.