Residents of Vuwani in Limpopo on Saturday reached a stalemate with provincial government over a municipal boundary dispute. However, a shutdown of schools and businesses, scheduled to start on Monday, has been postponed to give Limpopo Cooperative Governance MEC Jerry Ndou time to consult his national counterpart, Zweli Mkhize. Ndou led a delegation of officials that met a group of residents’ leaders under the auspices of the Pro-Makhado Task Team. This group is spearheading the protest against efforts to incorporate the area into the newly constituted Collins Chabane Local Municipality, which has its seat in Malamulele. In addition, residents want service delivery in the area to be provided by the Vhembe District Municipality, in accordance with the deal brokered by former president Jacob Zuma and Vhavenda King Toni Mphephu-Ramabulana. Once Ndou and Mkhize have held talks, they are expected to provide feedback within 14 days. The discussions are expected to revolve around the decision by the Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB) to incorporate the area into the new municipality. Mkhize has met the MDB’s officials and highlighted the importance of their role in ensuring stability in communities throughout the country. The MDB is expected to resume municipal demarcation after next year’s elections. But task team spokesperson Nsovo Sambo pointed out that the elections would be in jeopardy in the Vuwani area if the matter was not resolved by then. He said residents wanted to remain under the jurisdiction of the Makhado Local Municipality. “We do believe we need to find resolution on this matter. It’s not as if we are just here to surprise the government with our demands. We have communicated with them, so we believe they will address those issues. “Under the current uncertainty, the government should answer the people by keeping the promise to completely solve the problem or redetermine the boundaries before the national general elections, as the current status poses greater threat,” Sambo said.