A gunman has been charged with the killing of five people at The Capital Gazette newsroom in Annapolis, Maryland. Jarrod Ramos, 38, fired through the glass doors of the Capital Gazette offices around 3pm on Thursday, killing five newsroom staff and injuring two others. Ramos has been charged with five counts of first-degree murder and is in custody. According to reports, Ramos was armed with a shotgun and smoke grenades when he burst into the publication’s office and opened fire. The newspaper published a morning edition with tributes to Gerald Fischman, Rob Hiaasen, John McNamara, Rebecca Smith, and Wendi Winters, the slain staffers, a day after the fatal shooting. One of Winters’ daughters said to CBS Los Angeles on Thursday night that “knowing her was a gift”. She was a reporter and a mother of four. Smith, who worked in sales, was engaged to be married. Fischman wrote editorials and was known as the voice of the paper; he had recently married for the first time. McNamara covered local sports for two decades and Hiaasen was a loved columnist and mentor who had just celebrated his 33rd wedding anniversary. He passed away on his wife’s birthday. US media reported that the gunman had a long-running dispute with the newspaper over a 2011 story “that covered a criminal harassment case against him” and and he sued it for defamation in 2012. He also sued former reporter Eric Thomas Hartley who now works for another paper and was not at the shooting. “In the story a former school mate accused Ramos of stalking her, the courts repeatedly sided with the paper and documents showed that Ramos pleaded guilty to stalking the women,” said Peter Daut from CBS Los Angeles. Authorities said that Ramos seemed to have a “vendetta” against the paper and that the shooting was a “targeted attack”. He is said to have gone through the first floor of Capital Gazette and aimed at his victims one-by-one. An intern inside the newsroom sent desperate tweets immediately after the first shots were fired, “active shooter 888 Bestgate please help us,” in a bid for the public to notify police. “Gunman shot through the glass door to the office and opened fire on multiple employees. Can’t say much more and don’t want to declare anyone dead, but it’s bad,” another tweet read. Ramos allegedly damaged his fingerprints in an attempt to avoid arrest and prolong identification. Police said that Gazette had received threats on social media prior to the shooting and that investigations were underway to find out if the threats were related to Ramos. Police response was immediate with forces arriving on the scene in 60 seconds. “The governor and the mayor have said that ‘they went in without hesitating and they exhibited tremendous courage’ without this, it is almost certain that there would have been several more lives lost or more people injured,” said Kristen Fisher from Fox News. Ramos will have a bail review tomorrow at the Annapolis District Courthouse at 10:30 am, American time. - Additional reporting by AP and AFP