The Freedom Charter – which declares unequivocally in its preamble that South Africa belongs to all who live in it and that no government can justly claim authority unless it is based on the will of the people – has been the policy lodestar of the direction South Africa has been taking since its adoption in 1955. These were the sentiments expressed by Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthethwa, as he addressed the 63rd anniversary of the adoption of the Freedom Charter at the Liliesleaf Farm in Rivonia on Tuesday. “For us it’s a beautiful day as we commemorate the essence of the freedom charter itself and as we reflect on the road South Africa has traversed in the past 63 years since its adoption. “The Freedom Charter was a turning point in South African body politics, for the first time South Africans were stating what they were for and not just what they were against. They were laying bare the kind of future they wanted to see,” said Mthethwa.  The minister also said it was encouraging to see that “of late, polices of the Freedom Charter were really come to the fore, such as the issue of land and the issue of education”. He added that “South Africa was on the road to realising the Freedom Charter in its entirety”. National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa’s KwaZulu-Natal regional secretary, Mbuso Ngubane, challenged Mthethwa’s sentiments saying: “The fast-fading ANC-led alliance, since it ascended to power has failed to champion the key socioeconomic demands of the Freedom Charter. “It is part of this reason that the electoral support of the ANC-led alliance has declined significantly, on the basis that the current leadership is fixated with championing a neoliberal and right-wing agenda that serves the rich and big business.” Ngubane called on the working class to observe the 63 years of this historic gathering by “unifying around a political programme that will give practical action for the realisation of the full and radical implementation of the Freedom Charter”, stopping short of urging them to vote against the ruling party. The trade unionist, however, did say that the working class needed to come to the realisation “that the ANC will never deliver anything that advances the interest of the working class and the poor. “The new dawn championed by billionaire ANC President Cyril Ramaphosa, dressed as a revolutionary programme is meant to send the working class into slumber, whilst neoliberal reforms are parachuted to squeeze the working class,” said Ngubane. Ngubane added that “the new dawn” promised by Ramaphosa’s administration would “continue to trap the working class and the poor into the fringes of a capitalist economy”. ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe said the party continued to be guided by the principles of the Freedom Charter.  Mabe also argued that the ANC was still a party led by the voices of the masses as exemplified by the party “gathering with civil society and others in a consultative workshop on its election manifesto on Monday which highlighted that the party is mindful of this historical mission”. “The African National Congress calls on government to redouble its efforts towards realising the wishes of our people as guided by their articulations in the Freedom Charter. Our country and its people must hold us accountable against the realisation of what they said 63 years ago. We must also, as stated in this historic document, ensure that our government is truly a people’s government,” said Mabe. Ngubane however maintained that: “Under the ANC-led alliance, levels of poverty have skyrocketed; unemployment rate has escalated and corruption has risen to uncontrollable levels; public health-care has collapsed, and public education continues to reproduce cheap labour for capitalist owned industries. This has effectively rendered our country helpless and doomed” The trade unionist said it was time for a “new political leadership that is committed and willing to act in the interest of the best majority”.   