The tax season will be three weeks shorter this year in an attempt by the South African Revenue Service (Sars) to deal speedily with claims. This year’s tax season will be from July 1 to October 31 for all individual non-provisional taxpayers, acting Sars commissioner Mark Kingon announced at a briefing in Tshwane on Monday. “A shorter filing season allows additional time for Sars, taxpayers and the tax fraternity to deal with return verifications before most taxpayers go on the December holiday break. Often there are delays with taxpayers having to respond to our queries and requests over the holiday break,” said Kingon in a statement. Sars says it hopes this tax season will allow for a smoother and more efficient use of resources, especially towards those that file their tax returns at a branch. Kingon said that the simplist and most convenient way to file tax returns was through eFiling. “It is a channel anyone with internet access can use – anywhere, anytime, and is available 24/7,” he said. Sars says it has been hard at work taking stock of its services and some of the findings that helped inform the decision to cut the tax season short were that in 2017: - 1.6 million people who did not need to submit a return did so anyway by going to a branch; - 733 000 returns were submitted for prior years which makes processing of current year assessments more challenging; - 868 562 registered eFilers went into a branch to file their returns; - job seekers who require a taxpayer reference number clog the branches when it can be provided by an employer online; - 120 000 tax returns were filed by tax practitioners who used branches instead of using the online platform. On Sunday, City Press reported that Sars started the first month of the 2019 tax year on a pedestrian note, as it missed its collection targets. Read: Slow start to Sars tax collections This year’s theme from Sars is “No Sweat”, as it aims to make tax compliance a simple and routine experience. Provisional taxpayers who use eFiling have until January 31 next year to file, while the deadline for manual submissions is September 21.    • The taxpayer’s total employment income/salary for the year of assessment(March 2017 to February 2018) before tax was no more than R350 000; • Employment income/salary for the year of assessment was received from one employer; • The taxpayer has no other form of income (e.g. car allowance, company car fringe benefit, business income, taxable interest or rental income or income from another job); • The taxpayer does not want to claim for any additional allowable tax related deductions or rebates (e.g. medical expenses, retirement annuity contributions, travel expenses, etc.). 