Ingquza Hill Local Municipality manager Mluleki Fihlani has accused the ANC in the region of trying to oust him from his position. This follows last week’s resolution by party councillors to place him on special leave following instructions from ANC provincial bosses. Fihlani has been instrumental in getting the municipality a clean audit, and has been at the helm since 2006. Last week, Fihlani told City Press how tight financial controls, strict adherence to procurement processes and not allowing politicians to meddle in the running of the administration were the secrets behind the municipality’s clean audit. Now it seems he has angered some people who want to get their hands on the municipal purse. Fihlani believes people frustrated with his tight financial controls, which prevent them or their allies from looting the coffers of the municipality, were behind the moves to get rid of him. “There are those particular people who think that, if they can get rid of this person [the municipal manager], they will be able to get their hands on the purse strings of the municipality,” said Fihlani. ANC provincial secretary Lulama Ngcukayithobi said the decision was made after a battery of complaints against Fihlani. He said the allegations pertained to Fihlani’s relationship with businesspeople and employees, and an instruction to demolish people’s houses, which resulted in the arrest of mayor Pat Mdingi, which he said was unprecedented. “It is in the interests of the people of Ingquza to be given an opportunity to have their complaints investigated,” Ngcukayithobi said. “So, it’s not a decision of the ANC, but a decision of that particular council on the basis of them being mandated by complaints from left, right and centre.” He said the caucus felt it was better to place Fihlani on a special leave so that the department of cooperative governance and traditional affairs could make a basic assessment on the validity of the claims. “Those claims are very serious. The municipality almost closed for two weeks, with residents shutting the municipality,” he said. Xolisani Malindi, Ingquza Hill ANC sub-region secretary, said they accepted the decision by the provincial executive committee of the ANC. “We don’t regard these as attempts to remove the municipal manager, but as the ANC providing leadership. “We believe they have carefully considered their decision and hope it’s the decision that will further strengthen the institution and the ANC,” Malindi said.