The ethics committee in Parliament has expressed concern about the number of late disclosures of the register of members’ interests for 2017 that has more than doubled from the previous year. In 2016, 17 Members of Parliament submitted their disclosures late, and last year 42 MPs submitted late. The deadline for MPs to submit their disclosures last year was September 30. The committee said the register is published “to ensure transparency and to instil public trust and confidence in Parliament”. MPs who made late submissions will need to write to the subcommittee, tasked to handle the matter, with reasons for their lateness. Committee co-chairperson Nkosiyakhe Masondo said after the subcommittee had made recommendations to the ethics committee, it would be able to disclose whether the MPs with late submissions were from the National Council of Provinces or the National Assembly. However, the committee said it was happy that all those legally obligated had submitted their disclosures. President Cyril Ramaphosa was gifted more than 10 books, including Judge Dikgang Moseneke’s My Own Liberator: A Memoir. He also received boxes of Cuban cigars and bottles of wine and vodka, as well as a herbal miracle cream, EWN reported. DA leader Mmusi Maimane scored Newlands rugby tickets and complimentary accommodation at Fairways Hotel and The Palazzo Montecasino. DA chief whip John Steenhuisen was gifted Cuban cigars, while Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba received a number of DVDs and CDs, five of which were from gospel musician Thinah Zungu. Inkatha Freedom Party leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi got flights to Hong Kong and four nights hotel accommodation, meals and transport courtesy of China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs. United Democratic Movement leader Bantu Holomisa received Vodacom July Handicap Tickets and golf tournament accommodation. Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform Maite Nkoana-Mashabane was gifted a watch during an official visit to Qatar, as well as a fur coat. The MPs who declared no gifts included Police Minister Bheki Cele, Freedom Front Plus leader Pieter Groenewald, ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe, Economic Freedom Fighters leader Julius Malema, ANC MP Mandla Mandela, DA MP Natasha Mazzone, EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi and the party’s chief whip Floyd Shivambu.