Dr Mpho Phalatse has issued an apology for the recent pro-Israel comments she made during a speech at the 2018 Friends of Israel conference. The comments by Phalatse, a member of the mayoral committee for health and social development at the City of Johannesburg, saw her being suspended by Mayor Herman Mashaba and criticism from the public and political groups such as the Economic Freedom Fighters, who immediately called for her resignation.  The ANC caucus in the City Of Johannesburg also condemned her remarks, when she said: “I am a friend of Israel, and the City of Johannesburg is a friend of Israel. Shalom! Shalom!”  The ANC said that the Democratic Alliance, of which Phalatse is a member, “does not see the importance of extending solidarity towards the Palestinian people who continue to face Israeli occupation and apartheid. In fact, the DA recently slammed our government for the decision to withdraw the South African ambassador to Israel.” In her apology, Phalatse said that in the unpublicised component of her speech, “I specifically spoke to the commitment of the DA and our government to achieving freedom, fairness, opportunity and diversity in Johannesburg.” “Labelling, hate speech or any type of discrimination or intimidation on the basis of race or religion are practices that have no place in the City of Johannesburg. It is the role of the department of social development to foster peaceful relations and social cohesion between all residents in the city, and this is a cause I remain committed to,” Phalatse said in her apology. The South African Jewish Board of Deputies called the backlash against Phalatse “attempts to silence South Africans who challenge the anti-Israel narrative. It is all part of an environment in which Israel is being demonised to a degree that bears no relationship to reality.” The board said that the uproar against Phalatse’s comments, like what happened to model Shashi Naidoo and radio host and celebrity Gareth Cliff, posed “a serious threat to democracy in our country”. Naidoo had in a social media post on Instagram, called Gaza a “sh*thole” after a debate with a follower, and her comment led to Naidoo losing many endorsement deals. Naidoo has since apologised and committed to visit Palestine on a “fact-finding mission” in an effort to “re-educate” herself surrounding the conflict in Palestine. She will be guided by the South African Council of Churches and South African Jews for a Free Palestine. In March, Cliff came under fire after saying that Israelis were entitled to protect themselves from Palestinians “clearly hellbent on violence”. “I looked at what was going on over there and I have done quite a lot of reading with quite a lot of the news articles from around the world and this claim that Israel shot demonstrators is just a blatant lie. It’s an absolute falsehood,” he had said on his online radio morning show on Cliff Central. According to the 2018 Israel and Palestine Human Rights Watch report, “Israel operates a two-tiered system in the West Bank that provides preferential treatment to Israeli settlers while imposing harsh conditions on Palestinians.” “In the West Bank, as of November 6, Israeli security forces fatally shot 42 Palestinians and wounded at least 3279, including passersby, demonstrators, and those suspected of attacking Israelis. In many cases, video footage and witness accounts strongly suggest that forces used excessive force. In this same period, attacks by settlers killed three Palestinians, injured 49, and damaged property in 106 incidents, according to United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,” the report said.  