ANC veteran and former high commissioner to Canada Billy Modise “contributed exceptionally to the achievement of a South Africa free of racial oppression and to the building of a non-racial, non-sexist and democratic country”. President Cyril Ramaphosa, in a statement expressing his deepest condolences to the Modise family, paid tribute to the 87-year-old ANC stalwart, who died on Wednesday night at the Unitas Hospital in Pretoria following a long illness. Ramaphosa had visited the ailing veteran in hospital on Wednesday. The Presidency confirmed on Thursday morning that Modise, who was also the chief of state security under former president Thabo Mbeki’s administration until his retirement in 2006, had been ill for some time and passed on after an extended stay in hospital since his admission. “Our country and our people have suffered a great loss in the passing of Ambassador Billy Modise. He served his country selflessly and diligently. He was a distinguished gentleman and leader of our people who contributed exceptionally to the achievement of a South Africa free of racial oppression and to the building of a non-racial, non-sexist and democratic country,” Ramaphosa said. The president’s spokesperson, Khusela Diko, said on Wednesday, when Ramaphosa went to the hospital: “President Cyril Ramaphosa has received with great concern news that struggle stalwart and distinguished diplomat Ambassador Billy Modise has spent an extended stay in hospital. “He has offered his support to [Modise’s] family during what must be a very trying time for them. The president has asked that all of us keep Ambassador Modise and his family in our thoughts and prayers during this time.” Contributions against the apartheid movement Modise is best known for his work in building the anti-apartheid movement in the Nordic countries in the 1960s. During his final year at Fort Hare University in Alice, the apartheid government introduced the University Extension Bill, which legalised tertiary segregation, forcing students of different races to go to separate universities. After several efforts to protest against the bill came to nought, the Bloemfontein-born Modise accepted a scholarship to Lund University. Modise became the ANC’s chief representative in Stockholm, a position he held until the ANC was unbanned in 1990. The struggle stalwart is the recipient of the Order of Luthuli – Silver Class for his contribution to the country’s democracy after spending 30 years outside South Africa and building the anti-apartheid movement in the Nordic countries. Read: From our archives: Exile taught me to trust whites – Billy Modise    