Not only was the Gupta family offering bribes and Cabinet positions to those they deemed most likely to advance their interests but they were also privy to top secret state information which they used to advance their business interests. These were the claims made by former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor on Tuesday when she took the stand for the second day to give testimony at the Zondo commission of inquiry into allegations of state capture. The revelations built on testimony given by Mentor when she first took the stand on Monday. READ: Vytjie Mentor, the China trip and the Guptas’ plans for SAA Mentor had earlier disclosed that apart from Ajay Gupta offering her the position of state enterprises minister – provided she tweaked the routes flown by South African Airways – he also told her of an imminent Cabinet reshuffle being planned by then president Jacob Zuma. On Tuesday she revealed that the Gupta brothers were also privy to sensitive state secrets. “Before even offering me the ministerial position and alluding to the cancellation of the state airline’s route, Ajay Gupta also brought forward an issue of Denel that involved a company in India and to the Indian government,” said Mentor. She explained that the issue was “top secret” and no private citizen knew about it, explaining that she only came to know about this issue because she was also a member of the joint standing committee on intelligence. State-owned arms company Denel has been in the spotlight for the wrong reasons and was recently embroiled in a scandal after revelations that the company had paid a bursary of more than R1 million for the son of then North West premier Supra Mahumapelo. READ: Denel chief falls over bursary for Supra's son Mentor provided no further details on what the top secret issue was in relation to since the disclosure of the information needed intelligence clearance which the commission has not yet been granted. Gupta’s legal representative, Advocate Mike Hellens, however, indicated his clients’ intention to file for leave to cross-examine Mentor on these allegations as well as former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas. Should Hellens be granted leave to cross-examine the witnesses, Ajay Gupta may be under pressure to also take the stand and offer his account of the sequence of events. Mentor’s testimony has so far implicated the Guptas, Zuma, aide in the presidency Lakela Kaunda and Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba. Zuma’s lawyers have informed Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo that they are “still deciding” whether they will make an application to cross-examine Mentor or Jonas and would be communicating their decision by Friday. Jonas’ testimony also implicated controversial businessman Fana Hlongwane and Zuma’s son, Duduzane. READ: ‘If you talk, we’ll kill you’ - Jonas reveals Even though he was implicated as a key component in the Gupta family’s alleged involvement in state capture, the younger Zuma has not formally applied for his lawyers to cross-examine either Mentor or Jonas. He has, however, made it public that he intended to testify at the inquiry if required to so‚ despite facing possible trial for alleged corruption on the basis of Jonas’ evidence. On Tuesday morning, lawyers representing the Zumas and the Guptas held a meeting behind closed doors with Zondo‚ which was described as “urgent”. It was during this meeting that the lawyers informed Zondo of their desire to respond to implications by Jonas and Mentor. Head of legal Paul Pretorius informed the commission that former Government Communication and Information System CEO Themba Maseko will testify on Wednesday.