Gautrain management has angered striking workers by only engaging with them through the media, and not treating their demands seriously. The United National Transport Union (Untu) has called on Transport Minister Dr Blade Nzimande to intervene in the protracted strike. “We have revised our demands but still haven’t received word from management,” said Untu communications officer Sonja Carstens on Wednesday. Untu is the largest union with at least 90% of the Gautrain workers [350] affiliated to it. “Management refuses to engage with us directly choosing to rather go to the media and say that our initial demands were too high,” said Untu communications officer Sonja
Carstens. The communications officer also claimed that her union and the striking workers were “fed up” with Gauteng Transport MEC Ismail Vadi, who has continued to sit on the sidelines and side with management over the striking workers. “The MEC and management have blamed striking Untu affiliated workers for intimidating workers who are not part of the strike, calling workers a bunch of hooligans and refusing to engage with them. “This strike has entered its 10th day and the minister refuses to intervene. We call on him to instruct Vadi to objectively intervene in the Gautrain strike,” said Carstens. Untu members revised their initial demands for a 10% basic salary increase, a housing allowance of R1 600, a transport allowance of R800 and incentive bonuses of R20 000 for all employees. The revised demands are: • A 9% salary increase across the board; • R8 500 entry level for conductors; • A 9% increase in the travel allowance; • A 9% increase in the night shift allowance; • A medical aid contribution of 55% employer/45% employee; • Travel allowance for staff at the Midrand depot: R400; and • A R15 000 incentive bonus The union said that Gautrain management did not directly respond to the first demands, “choosing rather to go to the media and say the demands were too much”. Bombela Operating Company the private company awarded the tender to build, maintain, operate and partially finance the Gautrain rapid rail system maintained that it could only offer a 8.5% increase in basic salary, increase in housing allowance from R750 a month to R813.75 a month, increase in night work transport subsidy from R31.84 a night shift to R34.55 a night shift. The company also offered a night shift allowance increase from R24.19 an hour to R26 an hour as well as medical aid contribution of 55% contribution by the company and 45% by the employee with no incentive bonus. This offer has been rejected by the striking workers who continue to all on the minister’s intervention as the protracted strike “was not good for all parties and involves and South Africans who utilise Gautrain’s services”. Reports claiming that the CCMA was in the process of mediating in the wage deadlock made the rounds on Monday as the strike entered its second week, however, Carstens has since dismissed these claims as being untrue. “So far there have been no direct negotiations with management,” said Carstens. Chaos erupted on Wednesday morning on the route to the Gautrain Midrand Depot after rocks and burning tyres where placed on the road in contravention of the interdict Bombela obtained against striking Untu members last week. However, Untu general secretary, Steve Harris, has maintained that workers were not to blame. “Untu does not take any responsibility for this illegal act. We were not aware of this until the union and our strike marshals arrived at the depot this morning. It must have been done by frustrated individuals who took the law in their own hands,” said Harris. According to Harris, Bombela infuriated members after responding to their lowered list of demands tabled yesterday in the media and not responding to the union. “The minister and the MEC should explain to the French-owned Bombela that South African workers deserves to be respected and not disregarding as they have been doing so far,” said Harris. The Gautrain Strike entered its 10th day on Wednesday, and the Gautrain, which ferries approximately 60 000 travellers a month has only been running during peak periods, with reduced services since Monday July 30, due to the strike. Carstens said the strike was set to continue until the minister and management started treated the matter with the urgency it deserved and common ground was reached.   