The case against Thabani Mzolo, who is accused of murdering his 21-year-old ex-girlfriend, Zolile Khumalo, will be heard in the Durban High Court from October 8 to October 12. This comes after Mzolo was indicted on Wednesday for the murder of the Mangosuthu University of Technology student. According to the indictment read out by prosecutor Calvin Govender at the Durban Magistrate’s Court on Wednesday, the State intends to call 20 witnesses to testify against Mzolo. Mzolo, wearing a brown leather jacket and Gucci shoes, made a brief appearance at the Durban Magistrate’s Court on Wednesday where he stood leaning forward as the indictment was read and interpreted. When asked if he understood the merits of the indictment by Magistrate Mahomed Motala, Mzolo nodded in agreement. Mzolo’s reserved demeanour was in stark contrast to his initial court appearances where he expressed no regard for the deceased’s family, court officials or the media. He grinned throughout proceedings, made “trigger signs” with his fingers and even went as far as showing his middle finger to journalists during court appearances. During his court appearance last month, the more remorseful Mzolo abandoned his bail application indicating a fear for his life as the motivating factor and has been remanded in custody at Westville Prison since then. READ: Murder-accused Thabani Mzolo ‘fears for his life’, drops bail application He confirmed to the court on Wednesday that he still did not wish to apply for bail and will remain in custody until his trial in October. Last month Mzolo’s attorney, Charl Claassen, told The Mercury that his client had handed him written instructions to “bring to the public’s knowledge, especially to the deceased’s family, that he will be pleading guilty to the murder of Zolile Khumalo”. However, in court there was no mention of Mzolo’s intention to plead guilty. Claassen had revealed that his client wished to convey that the motivation behind his decision was to provide the Khumalo family with some sort of closure. Khumalo’s family – who on Saturday attended an unveiling of a memorial fountain for the slain student at the university’s Umlazi campus – were in attendance at the court on Wednesday. Mzolo is accused of fatally shooting his ex-girlfriend Khumalo at the university’s Lonsdale residence after he apparently failed to accept that she rejected him. He seemingly confessed on Facebook to killing Khumalo. Govender, outlining the state’s summary of substantial facts, painted Mzolo as a jilted lover who struggled to come to terms with Khumalo ending their relationship. Mzolo’s next appearance will be on October 8 when his trial starts at the Durban High Court.   