Deteriorating wage negotiations between Eskom and trade unions were given a boost on Thursday when trade union Solidarity announced that its members had accepted Eskom’s offer of a wage. Solidarity chief executive Dirk Hermann said the trade union “accepts Eskom’s offer of a 7.5% increase for 2018, a 7% increase for years two and three with a guaranteed increase equal to the CPI on housing, as well as a once-off cash payment of R5000 after taxes. “Given the current circumstances, it is a very fair offer. For all our members across South Africa the right thing to do now would be to help prevent the economy from being hampered by an unreliable power supply,” said Hermann. Solidarity’s announcement came after Eskom met with employees at dispute resolution body the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration on Wednesday in an attempt to resolve an impasse over wage negotiations. Negotiations continued again on Thursday with other unions still digging in their heels with the utility’s stance on not wanting to offer bonuses to workers at the end of the year apparently being the major bone of contention. Hermann pointed out that “the bonus issue has not been settled yet” and that it would be dealt with at another forum. “It is hard to expect employees to accept that no bonuses will be paid when individuals at Eskom have enriched themselves unlawfully without there being any consequences for their actions,” said Hermann The trade unionist said his union would “now do everything within its power to stabilise the power grid” reiterating the union’s call on both Eskom and the South African Police Service to take drastic action against criminal elements that sabotage the infrastructure and intimidate workers. “For the past week, Solidarity members assisted under difficult circumstances to keep South Africa’s lights burning. Some of Solidarity’s members slept in power stations despite threats of assault and threats that their cars and houses would be set alight,” said Hermann. On Thursday Eskom spokesperson Khulu Phasiwe confirmed that industrial action continued to affect on operations at its sites. Despite warnings about possible power outages, Eskom did not implement load shedding on Wednesday or on Thursday morning. However, Phasiwe said as a result of the industrial action, Eskom direct customers may experience a delay in response and restoration times of localised power outages. Eskom assured South Africans that police would continue to maintain order and safe access to power stations as these are National Key Points. PULL QUOTE It is hard to expect employees to accept that no bonuses will be paid when individuals at Eskom have enriched themselves unlawfully without there being any consequences for their actions. Dirk Hermann