Gauteng MEC for Roads and Transport Ismail Vadi has welcomed the wage agreement reached between Bombela Operating Company and the United National Transport Union (Untu) which brings to an end the two-week Gautrain strike. “The Gauteng Provincial Government welcomes the agreement and hopes the situation soon normalises,” said Vadi. The MEC also thanked commuters for their understanding during the period. READ: Gautrain strike: Numsa warns trains will not be 100% safe Meanwhile, Gautrain spokesperson Kesagee Nayager said full Gautrain services will begin on Wednesday once the operational schedule had been updated. “In the meantime, the reduced service that is currently operational will be further enhanced for tomorrow and the details will be shared during the course of today,” said Nayager. Untu, which is the main union, finally agreed to an 8% wage hike across the board, a R900 housing allowance, a R5 000 incentive bonus in December, and another bonus linked to their Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) in July 2019 with the Gautrain operator and ended the protracted strike. Officials told a mass meeting at the Gautrain Midrand Depot on Monday that they had agreed to the 8% wage hike across the board following marathon meetings with the employer over the weekend. READ: Gautrain strike to continue until minister treats the matter with urgency The Gautrain strike has frustrated thousands of commuters as trains could only operate on a limited rapid railway service during peak periods. City Press reported last week that Untu was accusing Bombela – the private company awarded the tender to build, maintain, operate and partially finance the Gautrain rapid rail system – of refusing to engage with the union directly and instead choosing to go to the media. Untu also accused Vadi of sitting on the sidelines and siding with management over the striking workers. The union was previously demanding a 10% basic wage increase. The union also revised its R20 000 incentive bonus demand down to R15 000.   