At just 10 years old, Tshego Hatang has managed to summit the highest peak in Africa, Mount Kilimanjaro. With his father, Sello, the chief executive officer of the Nelson Mandela Foundation, Tshego embarked on the journey last Sunday, a symbolic day because it was the date Nelson Mandela was arrested before he was sentenced to 27 years in prison. The climb started at 10.33pm on Wednesday, and they arrived at the top on Thursday morning to mark Women’s Day and Albertina Sisulu’s centenary. Sello said celebrating Mandela and Sisulu’s centenaries was one of the reasons they undertook the journey – the other was to raise awareness about schoolgirls who didn’t have access to sanitary pads. The Grade 4 pupil at Victory House Private School in Florida, Johannesburg, told City Press that, although the journey was testing, he would do it again. Going up the mountain, his father said, was a tough but rewarding experience. Tshego had gone as far as Stella Point, which is 5 685m above sea level. The highest point on the mountain is Uhuru Peak, which is 5 895m above sea level. Sello said he cried when his son reached their destination. As a parent, he said he was initially reluctant to allow his son to climb further than Gilman’s Point, which is 5 681m above sea level. But Tshego wanted to press on to reach Stella Point and was assisted by other climbers to reach his goal. “When I found him at the top, I couldn’t hold back my tears. He was so determined. When I tried to stop him from going to Stella Point, he didn’t want to give up and said we were so close. That is something that I learnt from him. I could have stopped his dream too soon because I was worried. As parents, we should not to stop our children’s dreams because they might get hurt,” he said. Sello said his son wanted to reach Uhuru Peak, which wasn’t very far away, but, as a father, he had to intervene. Two years ago, Tshego had begged Sello and his wife, Thembi, to let him climb Kilimanjaro. But the family wanted him to delay the trip until he was older. However, after reading a story last year about an eight-year-old Canadian girl who had completed the climb, Tshego was more determined than ever. Thembi had told him about girls who missed days at school because they did not have access to sanitary pads, and this became Tshego’s cause. Sello said Tshego’s interest in hiking began about three years ago. He hiked regularly in the Drakensburg, the Suikerbos, at Walter Sisulu Botanical Gardens and the Westcliff Stairs. Sello said Tshego’s dream to climb Kilimanjaro and dedicate his success to a cause meant a lot to him. “It’s compassion. We need to instil a sense of service in our children. It should not be about climbing mountains, but about showing compassion for others. Every day, people climb mountains because their lives are tough. We need to instil compassion in our children so they can help to stop the suffering of others. I hope this will instil compassion in his schoolmates as well,” Sello said.