Duduzane Zuma’s culpable homicide case has been postponed to October 26 by the Randburg Magistrates’ Court. During the brief court appearance on Thursday, state prosecutor Yusuf Baba said the defence had indicated that it did not have enough time to review the docket against Zuma. “We have arranged a date of October 26 to revolve all pretrial issues and for transfer of his matter to a trial court” said Baba. Zuma is facing two counts of culpable homicide following a car accident in 2014. He was driving on a rainy night of February when his Porsche rear-ended Jabulani Dlamini’s minibus taxi on the M1 at about 10pm. Zimbabwean Phumzile Dube was killed instantly and three others were injured. Another passenger, Nankie Mashaba, died in hospital. Thursday’s court proceedings were intensified by the presence of former president Jacob Zuma, who made a strong statement of support for his son and sat behind him in the gallery.  There was a commotion in court as those in attendance whipped out their cellphones and took pictures. The father and son made small talk and joked with journalists prior to the commencement of the court proceedings.  After the postponement of the case the Zumas were flanked by a heavy security detail as they made their way outside. A group of people gathered outside continued to take pictures of the two with the former president smiling and greeting his supporters. Former president Zuma’s avid supporters, the Black First Land First (BLF) members, led by their leader Andile Mngxitama, were also gathered in support. Referring to AfriForum, who opened the culpable homicide case against Zuma, Mngxitama said “people who have no business being in South Africa are the ones going after Duduzane Zuma. Phansi ngeAfriForum phansi [down with AfriForum down],” yelled Mngxitama.  The BLF leader also took the opportunity to warn AfriForum that they would not be intimidated by the organisation’s targeting of individuals such as Zuma and promised to continue supporting the Zuma family.