The Tshwane University of Technology has appointed audit firm SNG-Grant Thornton to conduct a full-scale forensic investigation into student representative council elections that took place last week. Last Thursday at the institution’s Soshanguve North campus, violence erupted after allegations of irregularities in the 2018 student council elections, and a student was killed. Katlego Monareng – who was a third-year law student – was allegedly shot by the police. “The investigation will complement that of the Independent Police Investigative Directorate into the death of our student,” said Willa de Ruyter, TUT spokesperson. “The investigation is scheduled to be completed within the next three weeks. The university is committed to implementing the recommendations to prevent a recurrence of this tragic loss.” READ: ‘We fired at the ground’ – Police deny killing TUT student Professor Lourens van Staden, the university’s vice-chancellor, said they would get to the bottom of the matter no matter what. “No stone will be left unturned to get to the bottom of the alleged election irregularities that led to the disruptions and the subsequent shooting. The findings of the investigations into Monareng’s death and the forensic investigation instituted by TUT into the alleged election irregularities will go a long way to ensure accountability,” said Van Staden On Wednesday students embarked on a march to the Union Buildings in Pretoria in an attempt to meet with Police Minister Bheki Cele. On Thursday, the university will host a memorial service for Monareng and will assist the family with funeral arrangements that are planned for Saturday in Bushbuckridge. “We agree with TUT management. The campus will remain calm and no destruction of university property will be tolerated,” said one of the student leaders, Sthembiso Shandu. On Monday, one student was rushed to hospital after she was allegedly shot in her leg by the police. She was apparently hit by a rubber bullet. The students at the Ga-Rankuwa campus were striking in solidarity with the Soshanguve students. The university has suspended academic activities at all the institution’s campuses in mourning the death of Monareng. The institution’s flag is expected to fly at half-mast until the end of the week.