A friend and an advocate for peace and human rights – that is how the foundation of former President Nelson Mandela paid tribute to the late Kofi Annan. Annan (80), former UN secretary-general and Nobel peace prize laureate died peacefully yesterday after a short illness, according to a statement released by the Kofi Annan Foundation yesterday. As a son of Ghana, Annan’s foundation said, the global statesman felt a special responsibility towards Africa. Shortly after the news broke, tributes started pouring in, hailing the statesman for his contributions to world peace and justice. At the time of his death, he was the chairperson of The Elders – a group of world leaders, peace activists and human rights advocates – who were brought together by Mandela and his wife, Graça Machel, in 2007. Annan had succeeded Archbishop Desmond Tutu as The Elders chairperson in May 2013. He was also a founding member of The Elders, who yesterday expressed their devastation, shock and sadness at his death. In a statement, the Nelson Mandela Foundation said it was devastated and saddened. “On behalf of the chairman of our board of trustees, the board, our chief executive and the staff of the Nelson Mandela Foundation, we send our deepest condolences to his wife, Nane, and their children Ama, Kojo and Nina. We regarded him as a friend and he enjoyed a close relationship with Nelson Mandela over many years.” The foundation said the two leaders developed profound mutual respect as they worked together on numerous projects and interventions, including the Burundi peace process in the late 1990s and the early 2000s. Their friendship blossomed from there. In 2007, Annan delivered the fifth Nelson Mandela Annual Lecture. Last month he was an honoured guest at the 16th Nelson Mandela Annual Lecture, delivered by former US president Barack Obama. The Nelson Mandela Foundation said it was during this visit that chairman Professor Njabulo Ndebele and chief executive Sello Hatang handed Annan his Nelson Mandela Annual Lecture bust in recognition of his support for Madiba’s work and as past lecture speaker. Speaking of Annan in 2002, the foundation said Madiba called him a “courageous leader”, and hailed him for his ability to link the wellbeing of children and the security of the international community as a source of inspiration. The foundation said Africa and the world had lost a special human being. President Cyril Ramaphosa expressed his deep condolences at the passing of Annan. Speaking shortly before his departure from Windhoek, where he attended the 38th SADC Summit, Ramaphosa said Annan’s death was a great shock and loss to the global community. He hailed Annan “as a great leader and diplomat extraordinaire” who had advanced the African agenda within the UN and had “flown the flag for peace” around the world. In a statement yesterday, ANC head of presidency Zizi Kodwa said the party had received with profound sadness the news of Annan’s passing. “An eminent and distinguished son of Africa, Mr Annan was a great friend of the people of South Africa who played an immeasurable role in shaping the global agenda in favour of the people of the developing South. As the seventh UN secretary-general from 1996 to 2006, Mr Annan painstakingly utilised his tenure to advance peace and sustainable development, while working determinedly to push back the frontiers of poverty and underdevelopment.” He said among Annan’s many passions was silencing the guns on the African continent and delivering universal health coverage to all its people. “The ANC joins the people of the world in mourning the departure of this great statesman. Our thoughts and prayers are with the Annan family during this difficult period of grief,” Kodwa said. Other political parties took to social media to pay their tributes. DA MP Stevens Mokgalapa said: “His absence will be keenly felt, and we offer our deepest condolences to his wife and family. He will be sorely missed and greatly celebrated.” The Elders deputy chair Gro Harlem Brundtland said in a statement: “We are devastated at the loss of our dear friend and fellow Elder. Kofi was a strong and inspiring presence to us all, and The Elders would not be where it is today without his leadership. “Throughout his life, Kofi worked unceasingly to improve the lives of millions of people around the world. While we mourn his passing today, we resolve as Elders to continue to uphold his values and legacy into the future. “The world has lost an inspiring figure – but one whose achievements will never be forgotten, and whose commitment to peace and justice will endure to inspire future generations,” the statement read.