While Athlone Stadium remains shut as the pitch is relaid, Premier Soccer League (PSL) side Cape Town City will have to share Cape Town Stadium with the city’s three National First Division (NFD) clubs – Ajax Cape Town, Cape Umoya United and Stellenbosch. According to the official NFD fixtures released by the PSL on Friday, all of the Cape’s NFD sides will be playing away on the opening weekend of the second-tier league’s new campaign, which kicks off on Saturday. This will make way for Cape Town City to host Golden Arrows on Saturday afternoon. On the same day, Stellenbosch will face Royal Eagles at Chatsworth Stadium in Durban. Ajax are away to Jomo Cosmos at Makhulong Stadium on Sunday, while Umoya will meet TS Galaxy at Kameelrivier Stadium in the former KwaNdebele area in Mpumalanga. PSL spokesperson Lux September told City Press: “We are facing a serious challenge in Cape Town because Athlone Stadium is not available. “We are looking at other venues, but there is an issue of compliance [that needs to be resolved]. The discussions are ongoing with the clubs.” While the NFD will start yet another season without sponsorship, September said the league would run as normal and the 16 clubs would each still get their R500 000 monthly grants. “NFD clubs also get a preparation fee of R1 million during the off season. And a further R500 000 [monthly grant]. That’s about R7 million per year, per club.” On whether football followers would be able to watch some NFD games live on television this season, September said: “Last season, we saw a number of NFD matches on television, this will continue this season. I cannot be specific with the number [of games] as yet.” All matches kick off at 3pm August 18 Real Kings vs Witbank Spurs (Sugar Ray Xulu Stadium) Royal Eagles vs Stellenbosch (Chatsworth Stadium) Uthongathi FC vs Tshakhuma Tsha Madzivhadila (Princess Magogo Stadium) Maccabi FC vs TS Sporting (Dobsonville Stadium) August 19 University of Pretoria vs Mbombela United (Tuks Stadium) Jomo Cosmos vs Ajax Cape Town (Makhulong Stadium) TS Galaxy vs Cape Umoya United (Kameelrivier Stadium) Richards Bay vs Ubuntu Cape Town (uMhlathuze Sports Complex) 