Celebrated and recently departed global music icon Aretha Franklin is, without a doubt, one of the greatest blessings and influencers of my generation. It is often said that familiarity breeds contempt. I have never met Aretha Franklin, nor have I watched her perform. But, out of sheer affection and profound respect (pun intended) to her, please pardon me as I simply refer to the Queen of Soul by her first name – Aretha. Aretha’s music became anthems to, not only the US civil rights movement, but the world too. She used her larger than life voice and unique talent to, not only entertain the world, but to also inspire many tortured souls. Paying tribute to her childhood friend and peer, music legend Gladys Knight described Aretha’s music as a soundtrack to many people’s lives. I can bear testimony to this, for Aretha is a welcome presence in my musical repertoire. I sauntered into this world just as Aretha’s star was rising. The four legged Pilot wireless stereo system that adorned my grandparents’ overcrowded matchbox home, was key to my musical edification and journey. As a youngster I often watched sheepishly, and sometimes in awe, as some of my aunts and uncles belted Aretha’s tunes with unbridled joy, and occasional teary eyes – testimony to the eclectic mix of emotions her unmistakable and soulful voice conjures. It was not until I was a grown-up lad, and could master the Bantu education issued Student Companion, that I could fully appreciate Aretha’s music. Its essence, resonance and profoundness, filled my cauldron of emotions through her powerful but yet angelic voice. Not only was Aretha’s music able to transcend generations, but it also transcended genres. The Queen of Soul was just as comfortable belting gospel hits as she was delivering pop, rock and roll, blues and jazz notes. Aretha leaves behind five decades’ worth of some of the most memorable live performances. One such performance came in 1998 when opera music supremo Luciano Pavarotti, too unwell to perform at the Grammy Awards, was replaced at the last minute by the Queen of Soul herself. However, instead of opting for one of her own hits, Aretha stuck with the aria most synonymous with her ailing friend Pavarotti, “Nessun Dorma”. In awe, millions of viewers across the world watched live on TV as the Queen of Soul hit the Puccini number’s signature high B with ease, stunning the Radio City Music Hall audience and sending the jaws of assembled artists to the floor. One of Aretha’s most celebrated performances was in 2015. This proved that sixty years into her career, Aretha was unmistakably still the Queen of Soul. US President Barack Obama could be spotted wiping away a tear during her rendition of “You Make Me Feel Like A Natural Woman” at the Kennedy Center Honors, where songwriter Carole King was being honoured. Perhaps one of the most inspiring and politically profound performances by Aretha was when she serenaded the first inauguration ceremony of Obama with her powerful delivery of America’s patriotic song “My Country ’Tis of Thee”. The melody used in this song penned by Samuel Smith is similar to that of the national anthem of the United Kingdom. The Queen of Soul pushed artistic boundaries of her craft every time she performed. It is little wonder that Aretha became the first woman to be indicted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. As we commemorate Aretha’s life, we must remember her unrivalled influence on music, and as a tireless warrior in the fight for civil rights. This is epitomized in one specific anecdote that resurfaced after her demise: when she offered to post bail for Black Panther political activist, scholar, and erstwhile communist, Angela Davis. In 1970, Davis was held in a New York prison for her connection to a California courtroom uprising that left four people dead following a shoot-out with police. Aretha’s stature as a civil rights activist rose against the backdrop of the US civil movement led by Dr Martin Luther junior, Reverend Jessie Jackson, and US senator John Lewis, among others. The Queen of Soul reportedly raised funds and also used her own resources to ferry marchers and activists for many public gatherings and marches. It is worth echoing that Aretha, a preacher’s daughter, refused to perform in front of segregated audiences –as it was the case in the 60s US. According to her biographer, Aretha struggled with depression, alcoholism and weight. Overwhelmed by fear and obsessed with control, apparently she would not step into a plane. Perhaps, the latter is the reason why she has never visited South Africa. Nonetheless, throughout her own pain and struggles the recipient of the Order of the Companions of O.R. Tambo award, was still able to comfort and inspire millions the world over. As a vessel of peace, hope and justice, Aretha influenced generations of musicians and remains an iconic voice for civil and women rights. My vinyl, VHS cassettes, CDs and DVDs collection of Aretha’s music is one of my prized possessions. Her inspirational music never fails to lift me up as and when my spirit needs uplifting. It may indeed sound cliché, but the Queen of Soul has left a void. Aretha is one of a kind. Aretha is simply irreplaceable. May the Queen of Soul’s dearly departed soul find respect as it serenades the heavenly beings, and rest in eternal peace. » Khaas is a social and political commentator. The queen of soul, Aretha Franklin passed away on Thursday at the age of 76 from pancreatic cancer. With a career spanning almost six decades, Franklin sold more than 75 million records and won 18 Grammy awards – and still holds the record for the most consecutive awards in a single category, wining best female R&B vocal performance from 1968 to 1975. Franklin is survived by her four sons. Pictures: AP, ABC, Reuters #ArethaFranklin #Soul #Music #RandB #Grammys A post shared by  City Press (@city_press) on Aug 16, 2018 at 8:13am PDT 