Deputy President David Mabuza was forced to leave as violent chaos erupted at Zondeni Sobukwe’s funeral just minutes after he arrived. The special official funeral, held at Graaff-Reinet’s botanical gardens, descended into chaos and Mabuza, who was supposed to deliver the eulogy, was whisked out before he could utter a word. Shortly after he left, Mabuza was seen talking to Public Works Minister Thulas Nxesi and an army of presidential protection officers who gathered around him on high alert. His convoy then sped off. At the heart of the commotion at the funeral of Pan Africanist Congress leader Robert Sobukwe’s wife was PAC members’ demand that programme director Defence Minister Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula step down and allow one of their own to take charge. Another burning issue was the use of the South African flag draped over the coffin, which PAC members wanted replaced with their own party flag. PAC divisions were laid bare with mourners demanding that one of the party’s presidents, Narius Moloto, leave too. The PAC is divided into two factions – one behind Luthando Mbinda and the other behind Moloto. Mbinda’s faction dominates in the Eastern Cape. The funeral, also attended by former first lady Zanele Mbeki and Steve Biko’s widow Ntsiki Biko, was scheduled to start at 9.30am but got under way just before 11am. As Sobukwe’s coffin made its way to the marquee, Mapisa-Nqakula pleaded for order as a section of the crowd sang pro-PAC songs. But they sang “eMarikana badubula abantu” [in Marikana they killed our people] even louder. When proceedings finally got under way, the police led the national anthem which was followed promptly by the PAC’s own version. Again the crowd broke into song and refused to allow Mapisa-Nqakula to continue. The last straw came when one mourner stormed the stage and interrupted a speaker and he was thrown out, prompting Mapisa-Nqakula to announce that government was withdrawing from the funeral and would hand the flag draped over the coffin to Sobukwe’s daughter, Meliswa, at the marquee instead of at the grave site. Mapisa-Nqakula said the police would be withdrawn and the PAC would be allowed to bury Sobukwe as they wished. Afterwards an irritated Mapisa-Nqakula said she wished things could have been more dignified. “We live in times of these types of things,” she said. Government spokesperson Phumla Williams said: “Sadly we had to withdraw as government. You will appreciate that uMam’ uZondeni was granted a special official funeral schedule two, which meant the people of South Africa are saying thank you very much, we appreciate your activism to this gallant hero. “It was not an easy decision but we ended up giving uMam’ uSobukwe a send off that was full of drama. And we had to pull out.”