Buffalo City Metro in East London is hard pressed to explain a tender allegedly given to audit firm SizweNtsalubaGobodo outside of normal procurement processes. This comes amidst a widening public glare on the audit industry’s habit to cover up serious corruption in both the public and private sector. According to documents in City Press’ possession, the city manager, Andile Sihlahla, granted approval for deviation from the tender process to perform an annual stock count some five days after SizweNtsalubaGobodo had already completed the job on June 24 2018. It was also then that the order instructing the firm to do the work was granted, an invoice received and a payment voucher created immediately for settlement in three days time. Records showed that the city’s head of audits, Busisiwe Msauli, requested approval for deviation from the tender process on June 22 2018, which was the same day that SizweNtsalubaGodobo started working. “This means that SizweNtsalubaGobodo had started work without the necessary authorisation and this fact was known to the supply chain management,” said those close to the process. While both supply chain manager Nomandla Mxo and acting chief financial officer Ntsikelelo Sigcau supported the request for deviation, the date on Sigcau’s signature appears to have been later changed to June 22. Highly placed insiders in the Eastern Cape city have also questioned whether the tender was approved in line with the required three quotations system, which prescribed that at least three service providers should be considered for purposes of deviation. The Municipal Finance Management Act required a three quotation system for services above R30 000 and that the request be taken to council – which sat on June 25 – but that did not happen, said a source. SizweNtsalubaGobodo billed a total of R174 000 for the services, including VAT. The city told City Press this week that the entire process was being “subjected through the final checks and balances in line with the system of control of the municipality”. “This makes commenting into detail at this stage very challenging,” said spokesperson Samkelo Ngwenya. However, said Ngwenya, the municipality had opened a normal procurement process to procure the services of stock-taking for the financial year end “of which in terms of legal requirements of disclosing assets in the financial statements, must be completed before 30 June 2018”. He said that this was done through an open, transparent and competitive bidding process and all suitable service providers were invited though an advert published on June 15 2018 and closed on Wednesday June 20 2018. But no bids were forthcoming, Ngwenya said, adding that a further extension of the deadline until June 22 2018 was also unsuccessful. “To ensure that the assets records of the municipality are compliant to be disclosed in the financial statements, management then took a decision to procure through a deviation process.” He said that SizweNtsalubaGobodo was selected after an assessment of service providers in the municipality’s database. “The selection of the service provider in question was premised on its track record and also on the principle of the fair distribution of work and rotation,” he said. Ngwenya said the city was satisfied with the services that have been rendered, “particularly under such urgent conditions and hence upon receipt of invoice from the service provider, the payment was authorised by the responsible officials”. He said he could not comment on the irregularities highlighted because there was “a subject of the internal system of checks and balances of scrutinising deviation procurements,” which may “compromise our system of internal control and (do) a disservice to the professional relationship we have maintained with the service provider in question”.