The case against two former UJ executives who allegedly stole funds from the University of Johannesburg came to the fore once again when the Gauteng branch of the Economic Freedom Fighters led a protest outside the Country Club in Woodmead, Johannesburg, on Tuesday morning, where it was believed that Jaco van Schoor – the former deputy vice-chancellor of finance – was present. The EFF eventually moved over to what they believed was Van Schoor’s residence in Edenvale, where they waited outside to present a memorandum to him. Van Schoor, along with Professor Roy Marcus – the former chairperson of the university’s council – were earlier this month ordered to pay back the millions that they both allegedly channelled out of the university funds into private company accounts. The pair stands accused of defrauding the university out of nearly R14 million over a period of three years. UJ had brought an application of damages against the pair. The university, through an affidavit, said that the pair had used fraudulent invoices to channel funds which were intended for university’s upgrades and projects to companies linked to them. Speaking to City Press, EFF Gauteng secretary Malesela Ledwaba said that the party was tired of “white supremacy” getting away with things. “They were never arrested, which is why we wanted to bring it to the public’s attention. We’ll continue to trace them and push them. We will hunt for them until we take them to the police station ourselves so that they can be arrested,” Ledwaba said. “We are tired because African people find themselves on the other side of the law, even our own police officers deal with them but never the white people. These people stole money from black kids so we want justice,” he said. After waiting outside the residence in Edenvale, believed to belong to Van Schoor, Ledwaba said that no one was willing to come outside and meet them because they were scared. “We are going to continue to pursue this until action is brought against the two men,” he said. In response to the allegations against both men, their attorneys, Clyde & Co, sent City Press the following: “Both Professor Marcus and Mr Van Schoor vehemently deny the allegations made by UJ. "There is no basis whatsoever for a conclusion at this stage that they ‘stole money’ or in any way acted fraudulently or unlawfully. "When the high court granted the application for a summary judgment order, it did not have the benefit of the version of Professor Marcus or Mr Van Schoor on oath, nor did it hear argument from Mr van Schoor and Professor Marcus’ counsel. "Professor Marcus and Mr van Schoor are of the view that they have not engaged in any wrongdoing. "They welcome the opportunity for the matter to proceed to trial on its merits, so that they can fully ventilate the issues and clear their names. "To that end, it is confirmed that the application to have the summary judgment rescinded was launched on August 13.”