For most of us, eating creepy crawlies is not an appetising thought, but for Gourmet Grubb, a Cape Town company making ice cream from insect milk, it is a way to preserve the environment. EntoMilk is a dairy alternative made from insects. It is known to be rich, creamy and full of nutrients, and the perfect ingredient for a gourmet ice cream. On top of that, it is a sustainable food source and environmentally friendly to farm and produce. Leah Bessa, food science graduate and co-founder of Gourmet Grubb, said: “The name EntoMilk comes from the term ‘entomophagy’ which is the practise of eating insects. We have found a way to make an exceptionally healthy, sustainable and environmentally friendly dairy alternative from Hermetia illucens [the common name is the black soldier fly]. “The insects are farmed by a company in Cape Town, growing them on clean feed. We then harvest them from the company and process the EntoMilk through a process we can’t disclose as it’s protected intellectual property. EntoMilk is used interchangeably with normal milk, so we use the same amount of EntoMilk in ice cream as you would use normal milk.”  Insects are environmental friendly and sustainable to grow, said Bessa. She said insects are also high in protein, which means they are ideal for making a diary product, high in calcium and a good source of nutrients. “We believe ice cream is a great vehicle for introducing the public to the concept of insects as an alternative food source. It is delicious and demonstrates the palpability and versatility of EntoMilk,” Bessa said. “We have delicious ice cream flavours like chai latte, dark chocolate, peanut butter and banana bread. We only use natural ingredients for flavouring and honey for sweetness.” Bessa said they ultimately aim to introduce EntoMilk into the market as a dairy alternative in industrial applications and other value added products, such as cheese and yoghurt. “Consumers have mixed reactions. Many respond with curiosity and excitement, and they love the idea of making milk from insects, but we also get a few people who are a little apprehensive about the idea,” she said. “We tell people who are allergic to shellfish and insects to stay away from it, but so far we haven’t had an incident in which someone reacted badly.” Why is ice cream made from bugs so good for the environment? • Black soldier fly larvae can be farmed on a large scale in an urban environment and take up far less physical space in comparison to livestock, while also requiring very little food. • The time required to farm the flies is measured in days, not months or years, like dairy or dairy alternatives. • EntoMilk is more water-efficient and energy-efficient to produce than dairy or dairy alternatives. • The insects do not produce greenhouse gases, like typical agricultural animals, which are responsible for more than 60% of these damaging gases. Bessa said Gourmet Grubb wants to redefine the way people think about insects as an alternative food source and, specifically, an alternative dairy product. By challenging the way people perceive insects, they are planning to move away from the “novelty food” aspects of insect-based foods and start integrating insects into our daily diets. Gourmet Grubb is currently at the Earth Fair Food Market in Tokai, Cape Town, every Saturday morning.