In our diverse agricultural sector, farmers are buckling under rising production costs and stagnant producer prices while technological advances are imperative to stay competitive. For emerging farmers this is felt more keenly, writes Amelia Genis. Recently, an Overberg farmer decided to convert the family farm’s grain enterprise to the practice of controlled traffic farming (CTF), and to start the process he read everything he could on the subject. After years of following conservation farming practices – minimum soil disturbance, crop rotation and keeping the soil covered by retaining harvest residue and covering crops – CTF was the next logical step. CTF is the practice of keeping the movement of farm machinery on the same set of tracks to reduce the damage to soil caused by heavy or repeated movement of machinery across fields. Planning for CTF was aided by satellite images of the farm obtained from Google. Some cutting and welding followed to make all his equipment the same width. In the months before implementing the practice, he visited farmers in Australia and attended a conference on CTF in the Barossa Valley town of Tanunda. Not every farmer in South Africa will be able to go to such lengths to do things differently, however, the majority of farmers who eventually make these changes will either learn from the Overberg farmer at farmers’ days and informal farm tours or by inviting his foreign contacts to address local conferences. South African agriculture is immensely diverse. A variety of grains, vegetables and tree crops are grown, while different types and breeds of livestock are kept. What research and development there is into improved practices and new breeds or cultivars happens largely in the private sector. Practices employed on local farms include everything from almost industrial-style conventional farming with intensive use of off-farm inputs, to styles of farming that include practices that are less intrusive and aimed at mimicking nature and natural processes. Still, farmers are buckling under rising production costs and pressures to improve productivity. Before 1994 the expectation was that a democratic dispensation would herald a focus on sustainable farming practices and research into such practices. It did not happen. In fact, sustainable practices are used where farmers, market gardeners and nongovernmental organisations have taken a leap of faith, armed only with information from other countries and the results of small on-farm experiments. In the Western Cape grain farmers receive support from the provincial department of agriculture’s research into different aspects of conservation agriculture. Yet, the shocking truth is that the commendable research chair initiative of the National Research Foundation in the department of science and technology does not include a chair on practices for sustainable agriculture suited to South African conditions. Land dispossession and apartheid denied black people the opportunity to develop skills or to accumulate capital and resources, which increasingly are required to farm profitably. Alistair Fraser of Maynooth University in Ireland found that land transfers without post-settlement support have led to many failures in Limpopo, especially where there was an expectation that the beneficiaries would maintain commercial enterprises. To maintain high-value commercial farming enterprises after land transfers and in the absence of a suitably able state extension service, government expects commercial farmers to act as mentors or “strategic partners” in a range of joint ventures. Dissemination of information has also, to a big extent, become driven and financed by farmer organisations, such as Grain SA, the Citrus Growers’ Association and the National Wool Growers’ Association, and agribusiness. Farmers also learn from experts and other farmers at conservation farming conferences; at small grain, livestock and citrus study groups; and from on-farm flock evaluations. Farming is increasingly driven by advances in science and technology, and a considerable part of a farmer’s day is devoted to learning about new and improved grain or fruit cultivars, precision farming techniques that include water use efficiency and variable rate application of agricultural chemical, as well as methods aimed at increasing the productivity of livestock. Coupled with this, the increasing demand for residential land as well as for mining and protected areas makes it clear that a decreasing portion of land is available for agricultural production and providing food security to a growing population. Farmers will therefore have to incorporate knowledge and application of climate science, soil science, rangeland ecology, animal and plant breeding science, and irrigation and mechanisation technologies. The urgency of doing more with less is compounded by South Africa’s limited agricultural potential, and the fact that the cost to attain the same unit of output as most countries in the world is relatively high, argues Frans Swanepoel, a professor at the University of Pretoria, in a recent edition of The Conversation. South Africa receives on average less than 500mm of rain annually, compared with the global average of 860mm. According to Dr Mmatlou Kalaba of the University of Pretoria in a piece in The Conversation, South Africa’s decision to “play by the global rules of free trade” after 1994 placed the country’s agricultural sector in a difficult position. South African farmers were expected to compete against the best in the world, but the support that could have helped them was taken away. In addition, their main competitors globally benefited from supportive governments. “This meant that new black farmers missed out on the opportunity to catch up with farmers who had been supported previously.” Despite government’s stated aim to expand the smallholder sector to promote job creation, Professors Michael Aliber of the University of Fort Hare and Ruth Hall of the Institute for Poverty, Land and Agrarian Studies found that government attempts to support smallholder farmers have generally been “costly and ineffective”. In other words, while budgetary allocations to the sector “increased impressively” in the 15 years before 2012, few farmers benefited and the overall impact was small because of the way that the resources were distributed and used. While the idea of joint ventures between established players in the agricultural sector and emerging farmers seems like a good one, the reality is a mixed bag. There are numerous reasons for that – first of all, not every white farmer is mentor material, and not every African farmer needs a mentor. Secondly, the persistent and undifferentiated image of technologically advanced white farmers versus subsistence African farmers is not accurate and perpetuates the use of standard recipes for support to farmers. Thirdly, many of the successful examples of joint ventures depend on the personality of those involved, and it seems some of the successful new farmers benefit more from being supported by a combination of many different neighbours and committed extension officers than from a single mentor. While the land debate rages on, through a scientific and technological lens there is much to be done to not only provide emerging farmers with the support they need, but the significant spend on research and development needs to yield a sector that can deliver on food security needs. Genis holds a PhD from the Institute of Poverty, Land and Agrarian Studies at the University of the Western Cape. This is the second in a series of features about the science of food security and climate change, and is made possible with the support of the African Academy of Sciences