The ANC in Tshwane has been shaken by allegations of women abuse against new regional chairperson Kgosi Maepa, casting a negative light on the governing party during Women’s Month and a looming general election next year. The dispute started last month during the Gauteng ANC elective conference, where Maepa defended his decision to register a female ANC branch member as a voting delegate representing the regional executive. Regional treasurer Simphiwe Mbatha was against the accreditation of Dr Rebecca Dikgamela because she was not a member of the regional executive. However, senior ANC women leaders in the region close to Maepa rallied behind him and described Mbatha as a troublemaker. During the 2016 municipal elections, internal divisions in the ANC led to public violence which weakened the governing party and handed the opposition a majority vote in the capital city. According to Mbatha – in a letter asking for “protection” from the regional and provincial ANC Women’s League – the incident took place on July 19 on the sidelines of the provincial conference. Mbatha accused Maepa of threats, intimidation and abuse. “I therefore request the Women’s League to take this case seriously and protect me from this abusive man,” Mbatha said in the letter to the league’s regional secretary Gogo Ndlovana, and which was also copied to provincial secretary Mavis Mdlalose and her deputy Faith Mazibuko. Mbatha said she had queried Dikgamela’s eligibility to represent the regional executive but Maepa screamed at her, became rude, used expletives and threatened violence. She alleged that Maepa also insulted in his absence the former ANC regional deputy chairperson Mapiti Matsena. Maepa was soon expected to be replaced as leader of the opposition in Tshwane city council following his election as the new ANC regional chairperson last month. Mbatha said Matsena was among those who disagreed with Dikgamela’s participation at the conference. City Press heard that Mbatha had been among a group lobbying for Matsena to contest a position in the top five of the Gauteng ANC executive but Maepa preferred Dikgamela. Dikgamela was nominated for the position of provincial ANC deputy secretary but lost to Nomantu Ralehoko. Matsena was nominated for the provincial secretary position but he declined nomination and instead accepted to serve in the provincial executive. In a sworn affidavit this week, ANC regional executive member Kgaugelo Nkosi said she saw Mbatha challenge Maepa concerning Dikgamela’s case. “To my surprise [Mbatha’s] body language was so unacceptable in a sense that she was shouting at [Maepa], poking him in his face and accusing him of authorising accreditations without her consent.” Nkosi said Mbatha “even told the chair that he is actually a boy, he can’t tell her anything and she is not afraid of him”. She said that for several times a “calm” Maepa kept on requesting her not to talk to him that way “but she kept on raising her voice poking him on his face”. Nkosi said she heard that Matsena was also complaining and Maepa ultimately responded that Mbatha could tell Matsena to come to him. She said Mbatha continued referring to Maepa as “a boy” even after he had left the scene. Another ANC regional leader Motlalepule Mabena said in a separate statement that she found it odd that Mbatha jumped the regional body and reported others like the Women’s League. She heard that Mbatha was advised by the league’s leaders “to immediately report the matter to the upper structure because they needed to know the kind of leadership Tshwane has and that they themselves were no longer safe in the (region)”. Maepa on Saturday denied the allegations.