If anyone thought Orlando Pirates were done signing, think again. The Buccaneers are set to make two more acquisitions before the player transfer window closes on Friday. Kaizer Chiefs are also expected to announce Ugandan international defender Godfrey Walusmibi, while Mamelodi Sundowns coach Pitso Mosimane also hinted that he too could raid the market, only if he could afford Bafana Bafana rising star Phakamani Mahlambi. “There are about two positions we are considering before the deadline,” Bucs senior administrator Floyd Mbele told City Press yesterday. He refused to share any specifics on which departments they were looking to beef up, yet he ruled out any thoughts of the team offloading players at the same time. The Buccaneers announced nine new signings during the off-season - Brilliant Khuzwayo from Kaizer Chiefs, Vincent Pule, Ben Motshwari (both Bidvest Wits), Meshack Maphangule (Black Leopards), Paseka Mako, Abel Mabaso, Linda Mntambo (all Chippa United) and Kudakwashe Mahachi (Mamelodi Sundowns via Golden Arrows) and Asavela Mbekile (Sundowns). Of the group, only Khuzwayo is yet to kick an official ball for Bucs after undergoing surgery on his ankle early this month. While Pirates’ Soweto rivals Chiefs confirmed the capture of Lebogang Manyana this week, Amakhosi are yet to unveil Walusimbi. However, coach Giovanni Solinas may have dropped a hint that he has landed the highly rated 28-year-old from Kenya champions Gor Mahia FC. “The Uganda defender is coming because we have only one left-back. We only have [Siphosakhe] Ntiya-Ntiya...,” Solinas told City Press on the sidelines of his team’s MTN8 pre-match conference this week. The Italian, however, refused to elaborate more saying he was not allowed to talk about his club’s transfer dealings. City Press understands that a deal has been struck between Chiefs and Mahia over the move of Walusimbi and the suitors were in the process of concluding the paperwork. While on-field results have blighted Chiefs’ start to the new campaign, Amakhosi have received many plaudits on how they have dominated the player transfer market this window period. The Naturena-based outfit has acquired big signings without spending a cent in the transfers of the likes of Manyama, who is the latest after Khama Billiat to join on a free. Other Chiefs newcomers include goalkeeper Virgil Vries from Baroka FC, Letlhogonolo Mirwa from ABC Motsepe League side Buya Msuthu and Andriamirado “Dax” Andrianarimanana from Fosa Juniors of Madagascar. Andrianarimanana is yet to receive his work permit and he has also been recovering from injury. Having lost Keagan Dolly, Bongani Zungu in the previous seasons, and most recently Percy Tau, Mosimane believes Mahlambi (20) fits the description of the next talent that he would love to get for Sundowns. He said the aforementioned trio compares to the Al Ahly-based attacking midfielder Mahlambi, who has seen limited game time at the Egyptian giants. “Does it make sense to sign Phakamani if you consider the reference I made [to Dolly, Zungu and Tau]? I think it makes sense,” said Mosimane. His latest signing is defender Mosa Lebusa, who joined from the relegated Ajax Cape Town. Sundowns’ other signings in the current window are Lebohang Maboe (Maritzburg United), Andile Jali (KV Oostende, Belgium), Lyle Lakay (Cape Town City), Toni Silva (Levadiakos, Greece), José Alí Meza (Oriente Petrolero, Bolivia) and Reyaad Pieterse (SuperSport United). TALK TO US Between Chiefs, Pirates and Sundowns who has made the best signings and why? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword BIG THREE and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50