Sex made professor Elna McIntosh a wanted woman – but not in the way a woman might want or imagine. Back in the 1990s it wasn’t really the “in thing” to do, looking out for the sexual health and rights of female sex workers by giving them condoms or educating them on the importance of pap smears; let alone treating the guilt-stricken men, who had slept with sex workers, milling around her practice confessing their transgressions and hoping for a quick fix and HIV test. But she did the work – and then some. “We used to call the men who came into the clinic I worked in [in Johannesburg] at the time, the ‘regret Mondays’ ... they all had sex somewhere at the weekend and on Monday they would come giving us long stories at the clinic. So I started my research on what influenced their behaviour – and I called that behaviour ‘Afr-Aids’,” McIntosh, a revered sexologist, said this week at an event to mark her retirement after over two decades in the field. Treating just the men wasn’t enough though. McIntosh went knocking on the doors of The Ranch, a men’s erotic club in northern Joburg – and struck a deal with its owner Andrew Phillips to have talks with the women about sexual hygiene, breast cancer, condoms and HIV. It wasn’t long before the police went after Phillips, accusing him of bringing in illegal immigrants as prostitutes. Next on the list was McIntosh and her thesis, which was about 500 pages. She was served with a court order in 1999 to hand it over – which she successfully fought against for three years and the case was dismissed. That was just one of many battles McIntosh fought – and won – to advance sexual health rights. A breast cancer survivor, McIntosh’s other passion, was her activism on women’s rights to terminate pregnancies. Over the years she became an authoritative voice on matters of sex and sexuality – being quoted in more than 100 articles on male and female libido, sex positions and the psychology of sexual issues. After seeing a full page story in a local daily newspaper quoting her mentee and colleague, Dr Tlaleng Mofokeng, on vaginal health, McIntosh – who owns Disa, a sexual and reproductive health clinic in Sandton – joked about how different the times are today from when she started. “We can publicly speak on sexual issues now that we couldn’t 20 years ago. Our patients are now on our phones through social media and we have to meet them there … I’m not saying give medical advice on Twitter, but give them the accurate information they yearn for,” she told the room of fellow sexologists, psychologists and physiotherapists. “Sexual health is on the map – finally. And if there is one thing I’ve learnt, dealing with all sorts of patients coming with all sorts of situations, it is that it takes time, trust, talk and touch to do our job effectively,” she said. McIntosh was elected a lifelong member of the SA Sexual Health Association. Asked for a parting shot on sex for women in general, she said: “Touch yourself to know yourself. You would be surprised at how many women haven’t ever looked at their vaginas.”