The newly elected leadership of the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) will look to mend fences by deploying to government some of its top members who were not elected at last month’s watershed provincial elective conference. Speaking to City Press, provincial secretary Mdumiseni Ntuli said the province had learnt tough lessons from the past three years, including from the aftermath of a wholesale winner-takes-all reshuffle of the provincial cabinet after the 2015 conference. “One of the things we want to do after elections is to deploy comrades who are not elected to be in government departments if they are capable. “KZN has always done that by the way. That is why when we did the recalls after the 2015 conference it became a serious and painful experience because we were not used to that culture; that those who are not in leadership could just be recalled. If we have not learnt any lesson from that, then we would not be deserving to lead our people,” Ntuli said. Last month’s elective conference followed a protracted legal battle stemming from the conference in 2015, which was nullified by the Pietermaritzburg High Court last year. The cold war that followed saw the province, which has previously enjoyed kingmaker status at national level, left in the political wilderness. Last month’s conference saw the rise of a new guard with ANC Youth League and former youth league leaders, including Ntuli, clinching strategic positions. The conference also saw the defeat of former president Jacob Zuma’s staunch allies, signalling that the party was loosening his grip on the key decision-making structure. The new secretary said it was up to the new leadership to work to regain the province’s powerful position, though it was not yet having sleepless nights over the ANC’s next elective conference in 2022, where the province will have a shot at coming back on top. “It is not our preoccupation yet because it has the potential to distract us from the urgent task now, which is to be exemplary in how we forge unity after serious difficulties. The second task is that we are the leading province in terms of elections and we must maintain that,” he said. “It is only on the basis of the two that other provinces will give us the green light to come back where we were in terms of [our position] at a national level. We want to earn that, we don’t want to decree it. We want to earn it and these are the two tests. If we pass these two no one can deny us that standing.” KwaZulu-Natal contributes to more than 20% of the ANC’s national vote. About whether or not members should be punished for dragging the ANC to court in future, Ntuli said the party needed to look at cleaning up its own processes before turning on its members. “We still believe that if we have been clinical and exhaustive, and undergone processes in a caring way, then there must still be consequences for those who want to deviate and go to court,” he said. “But each and every time someone goes to court we should not only rush to discipline them, but we must also check that we have not omitted or committed something on our part that has sent that person running to the courts because going to court is not only done by people who do not care about the ANC. “It is also done by people who we believe care for the ANC and who believe that unless they feel an injustice is overcome then the ANC will go down the drain. We need to tread very carefully; our approach must be proper in process, so it is difficult for anyone to go to court.” As the new leadership gears up for a gruelling election campaign, it must also contend with the matter of Zuma’s court appearances. The ANC earlier this year gave Zuma the status of being the face of its elections campaign when the national executive committee deployed him, instead of an official, to the province for voter registration weekend. However at last week’s court appearance, Zuma appeared to give voters the go ahead to vote for Andile Mngxitama’s Black First Land First party, which had been present and given a platform to speak at all of Zuma’s court appearances. Ntuli said: “Let us assume that is what he said. As the ANC we don’t think that it would be appropriate for our former leader to be seen privately or publicly, directly or indirectly endorsing anyone who is an opponent of the ANC. We don’t think that should be the case. “I don’t know the context because I wasn’t at court, but the mere fact that there is now a narrative that says he appeared to be mobilising for another organisation is a problem. I’m sure at some point former president Zuma will engage with that statement and help all of us to understand.”