Zimbabwe’s Constitutional Court on Friday confirmed President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s disputed July 30 victory, dismissing an opposition challenge that had held up his inauguration. In a unanimous ruling of the nine judges of the country’s top court, Chief Justice Luke Malaba said opposition leader Nelson Chamisa had failed to prove allegations of fraud during the presidential vote. The election, in which Mnangagwa and Chamisa were the main contenders, was touted as a crucial step towards economic recovery and shedding Zimbabwe’s pariah reputation, but instead has left the nation deeply polarised. An army crackdown in response to post-election violence by opposition supporters left six people dead on August 1, recalling the heavyhanded security tactics that marked the 37-year rule of Robert Mugabe, who was removed in a coup last November. Zimbabwe’s constitution required that if Mnangagwa was confirmed the winner, he should be inaugurated by Sunday. Chamisa’s lawyers accused the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission of inflating Mnangagwa’s vote tally by 69,000 to avoid a runoff, and that the ZEC’s revision of the results was sufficient evidence that fraud occurred. Lawyers for Mnangagwa and the ZEC brushed aside the allegations and said Chamisa had failed to provide tangible proof. Mnangagwa now faces the challenge of persuading the international community that the army crackdown and lapses in the election process will not derail his promise of political and economic reforms needed to fix the economy. Political analysts said the Constitutional Court was unlikely to call for a fresh election. It could, however, order a recount of the ballots. Police blocked roads around the court, a 19th century British colonial building just opposite Mnangagwa’s offices in central Harare. Vehicles carrying water cannons reappeared on streets near the court house while riot police patrolled the city centre in groups. The state-owned Herald newspaper said in an editorial: “When the gavel falls, peace must prevail.” – Reuters