There is some tension in the ANC as the future of some former Cabinet ministers who are now backbenchers in Parliament is being discussed. ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule wants David Mahlobo, Tandi Mahambehlala, Joe Maswanganyi or Bongani Bongo to be appointed as the chairs of three National Assembly portfolio committees. The matter was scheduled to be discussed during the party’s national executive committee (NEC) meeting on Saturday, according to sources within the NEC. Sources have told City Press about a standoff between Magashule and ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu after the secretary-general this month wrote to Mthembu about appointing the former ministers as chairs of portfolio committees. In his letter, Magashule allegedly wanted Mahlobo to chair the labour portfolio committee, which would fill a vacancy left by the death of that committee’s former chair, Fezeka Loliwe, who died in a car accident earlier this month. Former transport minister Maswanganyi would chair the public service and administration committee, which was previously chaired by Cassel Mathale, who is now the deputy minister of small business development. According to some sources, Magashule wanted Bongo for this position and Mahambehlala would become the chairperson of the tourism committee. Sources said that Magashule had claimed this was a decision the party’s national working committee made at the request of the political committee through his office. Mthembu sits in the political committee, a subcommittee of the national executive that is responsible for the overall political guidance of the organisation’s parliamentary caucus and the office of the chief whip. The committee provides strategic direction to caucus on macro political matters within Parliament. “Jackson rejected that thing, saying there was no such request by the political committee,” said a source. “He was even saying he would understand if Magashule wanted to appoint the former ministers or deputies who had previously chaired portfolio committees,” added the source. Mthembu allegedly refused to make the appointments and wanted the matter referred to the NEC for a decision. Mthembu declined to discuss the matter, only saying that there was a process in making such appointments and the ANC didn’t speak to the media before that process was concluded. ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe said the NEC would decide on who fills the vacancies