Even before it has properly taken off, former ANC MP Makhosi Khoza’s new political party has run into internal wrangling that threatens to collapse it. African Democratic Change (ADeC) president Khoza has been accused by members of her own party of allegedly wanting it disbanded to pave her way back to the governing party. Disgruntled provincial and national ADeC leaders claim Khoza’s conduct, including pushing for a decision that the fledging party cannot contest next year’s general elections, reinforces their view that she is no longer interested in running it. However, Khoza has denied wanting to go back to the ANC. ADeC spokesperson Feziwe Ndwayana said: “She simply stated that the ADeC is not going to be oppositional for the sake of being oppositional. If Cyril [Ramaphosa] is fighting corruption, he will be commended. "However, that doesn’t necessarily mean that the ANC is the vehicle needed to take our country forward.” On Friday, ADeC provincial leaders met at the Yeovillle Hotel in Johannesburg, where the party’s future topped the agenda. Khoza had been invited, but refused to attend, according to those who were there. “We just adopted the constitution and the policy and our programme starts during the election registration,” said one member. However, the status of that meeting has since been called into question. Ndwayana said it was called by Lufuno Gogoro and Mpho Ramakatsa, “who are no longer part of ADeC”. “In ADeC we have a draft constitution that must be adopted in a national policy conference and, according to our current constitution, we have no gatherings such as imbizo.” Khoza’s critics in the party said she is being lured with incentives to deliver the ADeC to the ANC, but party members have resisted this. They claim the ADeC was intended to be a “sleeper party” for Ramaphosa’s ANC backers. It was to be used in the event that former president Jacob Zuma’s preferred successor, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, won the ANC succession race at the party’s national conference in December. “There is now a serious plan to collapse the ADeC because Ramaphosa won,” a provincial leader told City Press. Ndwayana said different sections of society had approached Khoza, including political party leaders who had asked her to return to the ANC or join their parties. She turned them down. “She dedicated herself to building ADeC, as South Africa and the continent need a political vehicle that will groom and nurture young people and women in particular.” Disgruntled members say what is fuelling their suspicions is an alleged meeting that took place between Ramaphosa’s lobbyists and Khoza, where a potential alliance and financial support were discussed. Last weekend, the provinces called a national convention to discuss the party’s future and hold Khoza accountable. The general sentiment has been that “if she wants to go back (to the ANC), let her go, but do not collapse the ADeC”. In a statement on Wednesday, Ndwayana said Gogoro and fellow national task team leader Ramakatsa were expelled from the party. “When an organisation is formed, usually individuals will form part of the process, informed by their values and principles. “However, it is normal that some individuals may have a different set of views that do not align with the organisation, and thus forms a need to part ways,” Ndwayana said. Gogoro said no one had been expelled. “All the confusion that has been there has been resolved and I cannot entertain that statement which has been issued to claim that a decision was taken in a meeting. “I am part of the national task team and there was no meeting which took a position to expel people.” Khoza allegedly aligned herself with a view that the ADeC could not contest elections next year. Those in other provinces said they knew better because they were “on the ground” while she spent her time in boardrooms. Ndwayana disputed this allegation. She said the ADeC has had teething problems and it was normal to have discussions about the feasibility of contesting elections. As things stand, the ADeC is contesting elections, she said.