Joburg socialite Omphemetse Joyce Molamu’s future career as a lawyer is in doubt because she now has a criminal record. She was convicted this week for insulting reality TV personality Uyanda Mbuli on social media. Molamu, who is a law student, said the guilty verdict shocked her. She said the case should have been considered for diversion – a form of sentence in which the offender joins a rehabilitation programme that will help remedy the behaviour, and thereby avoid a conviction and a criminal record. “I will not be engaging the media on this any further as I am consulting with my legal team on how to remedy the situation,” Molamu said. She said she applied for the diversion during her trial, but it was denied. “Social media is a platform where one can express oneself. And, in this case, the confrontation of what was happening led to assumptions of crimen injuria. “I did what any woman in the predicament that I was in would do. I wouldn’t have done anything differently. I believe in the truth and the fact that I did not insult nor tarnish anyone’s reputation,” she said, adding that the experience drained her emotionally. Molamu’s sentencing proceedings were set down for March 14. Mbuli gloated that Molamu was slapped with a guilty verdict for crimen injuria and defamation by the Midrand Takhof Branch Court, ending their longstanding case of “misrepresentation on social media”. Mbuli heaped praises on the criminal justice system in the country, saying she would not hesitate to sue anyone for defamation in future. Molamu was found guilty of taking to social media and calling Mbuli a “stupid b**ch” and posting her private phone number for everyone to see. She had also suggested on social media that Mbuli should find herself a blesser and take her claws off other women’s men. Molamu accused Mbuli of having an affair with her businessman boyfriend based on text messages, purporting to be romantic exchanges between the two, which were leaked to City Press. Mbuli lashed out at City Press for printing a story last year that she says painted her as a gold digger who was after other women’s men. Ironically, it was on social media that Mbuli received congratulatory messages and support after winning the case this week. Mbuli was emphatic this week that she had no romantic relations with Molamu’s boyfriend, reiterating her previous statement that she sent him WhatsApp messages because he owed her money. Mbuli, whose glam reality show It’s On, which is screened on SABC3, gives viewers a glimpse of her fast-paced, jet-setting lifestyle, said she took the matter to court to protect her brand and because many young girls look up to her. “The last thing I want is for them to think blessers are behind my success. I have worked very hard for every little thing that I have,” she said. “I am glad she [Molamu] got the guilty verdict and I can’t wait to hear what her sentence will be. She had to learn that the courts of law exist and be careful about how she abuses people’s reputations.” She added that she needed to clear her name because she was a businesswoman, and it was also in the interests of her employees – people who provided an income for their families – that her reputation remained untarnished. “The case affected my business as I was in the midst of moving from season one to season two of my reality TV show. Some of the people who believed in my show said: ‘So now we must watch how Uyanda’s blessers are taking her all around the world.’” She did not want her work and reputation to be “put into disrepute or sabotaged”. “You’re not only sabotaging me, you’re also sabotaging the people who look up to me and depend on me.”