“There is no direct link between our products and the [listeriosis] deaths,” is what Tiger Brands chief executive Lawrence MacDougall emphasised at a media briefing in Johannesburg this afternoon. He also said that the company found out about the source of the outbreak when the rest of the country did. The briefing came in response to Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi’s announcement on Sunday at the National Institute of Communicable Diseases that the deadly bacterium was traced back to the Polokwane Enterprise factory. MacDougall said that there was no evidence that the 180 deaths, which were a result of contracting the deadly Listeria bacterium, were a result of the victims consuming the Enterprise products. The company also could not take responsibility for the deaths because it had not received any communication from the department and had not received the results of the tests it had undertaken. READ: What is listeriosis and why is it dangerous? MacDougall, who was not present at Sunday’s briefing, told the media that he did not know why they were not made aware of it sooner – the first he heard of it was during the health department’s general announcement. MacDougall said that stringent controls were in place in order to ensure that the food products adhered to strict health standards. “To give you some insight, Enterprise’s food follows some stringent protocols for the manufacture of quality food products. This includes monitoring and testing for the detection and management of pathogens, viruses and bacteria, including Listeria.” MacDougall said that the company had issued a total recall of its products following Sunday’s announcement. READ: Listeriosis - Hunt for a killer bug “The company is working closely with the authorities to conduct a recall. After consultation with the National Consumer Commission, a full communication plan – including print, radio and online communication – will be rolled out at the soonest possible time, to help us reach consumers who have Enterprise products in their home,” Tiger Brands said. MacDougall said that although the department of health had called for a recall of only three products – Russians, polony and Frankfurters – Tiger Brands had decided to recall all cold-meat products from its Polokwane and Germiston facilities. In order to help mitigate the damage that has been caused to consumers, MacDougall said that production of the affected products had come to an immediate halt and a hotline had been set up for consumers to seek help and advice. McDougall assured the media that the company was trying to be as transparent as possible, and that the recall process, which included the recall of imported products, would be communicated to the media and public in due course. The Limpopo government also reacted to the outbreak, by saying it was engaging various stakeholders and would be meeting with the Chamber of Business this afternoon to institute a plan of recalling all affected products. “The provincial government welcomes the announcement and is currently engaging stakeholders such as department of health, Limpopo economic development, environment and tourism, Polokwane municipality, the business community, Capricorn district municipality and other stakeholders involved on this issue of the Listeria outbreak,” provincial government spokesperson Phuti Seloba said today. Seloba added that government environmental practitioners were hard at work conducting more tests.   