The recall of polony and other processed meats is going to have a major effect on deeply indebted consumers. The recall was implemented by Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi because it was feared that these processed meats were the source of the devastating listeriosis outbreak that killed 180 people The poor depend on a cheap source of protein and products such as polony, Russians and other processed meats are by far the cheapest form of protein available on the market. Contrary to the belief of some, the majority of consumers don’t have spare cash. Most live a hand-to-mouth existence and even small adjustments in price such as the increased VAT rate, can have a major effect on them. The fact that there is not a ready replacement for these processed meats that form the main ingredients in township food like kotas and bunny chows is going to have a major effect on them. Enterprise Foods is pulling its polony and other processed meat products from supermarket shelves after one of its factories in Polokwane in Limpopo was identified on Sunday as the source of the world’s worst listeriosis outbreak. Rainbow Chickens has also recalled its polony loaves after one of its factories in the Free State tested positive for listeria. The recall affects cold meats, polony, Viennas and Russians being sold under the Enterprise and Rainbow brands, as well as the Bokkie, Renown, Lifestyle and Mieliekip brands. Pick n Pay has also, as a precaution, removed all ready-to-eat polony and Russian sausages manufactured at the Rainbow facility in Sasolburg from its Pick n Pay and Boxer stores. The fact that consumers will be reimbursed for the recalled products they have bought is welcomed but it still does not address the underlying problem of what township cooks and spaza shops are expected to use as replacements for these processed meats. All other forms of meat such as mince and even the cheapest cuts of beef are significantly more expensive which ultimately is going to have an impact on the nutrition of people. Coming hot on the heels of the higher VAT rate and other increases contained in the 2018 budget, the non-availability of many staple processed meats is going to have an adverse effect on the poorest of the poor and even on middle-class families who use processed meats as part of their staple diet. More than half of all South Africans are three months or more behind in their debt repayments, collectively owing about R1.73 trillion in debt (latest National Credit Regulator stats). South African consumers have consistently notched up the unenviable reputation as having one of the highest debt ratios as a percentage of GDP among emerging market economies. Having to replace a cheap staple with a more expensive substitute is going to have a negative effect on the debt load of many consumers. • Neil Roets is chief executive of Debt Rescue, one of the largest debt counselling companies in the country