Abuse, education, equality and active citizenry were some of the main themes that Deputy President David Mabuza touched on during the Human Rights Day commemoration event at the George Thabe Cricket Pitch in Sharpeville, Vereeniging. Mabuza gave the keynote address following on from Wednesday morning’s proceedings, where he took part in a wreath-laying ceremony along with Arts and Culture Minister Nathi Mthethwa and Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister Zweli Mkhize. “When the last order to shoot finally stung in silence, 69 souls lay dead. They stood still in the streets of Sharpeville, with 200 injured, their river of blood stood still in the soil,” Mabuza said as he relayed the tragic events which took place on March 21 1960. “Today we still evoke the memory of the finest stalwarts of the liberation movement who died 40 years ago, Robert Sobukwe,” Mabuza said as he paid tribute to Sobukwe and others who fought valiantly against injustices. Mabuza emphasised that the struggles which faced the current generation needed to be taken forward in order to help fight injustices against human dignity. This year’s Human Rights Day commemoration was held under the theme “The year of Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela: promoting and deepening a human rights culture across society”. Mabuza led the event on behalf of President Cyril Ramaphosa, who is currently leading a delegation to the African Union Summit in Kigali, Rwanda. Mabuza spoke of the violent murder of Taxify driver and student Siyabonga Ngcobo and slain student Karabo Mokoena, and that these injustices should not be happening. “We call on all South African men to be part and parcel of this revolution to protect women,” he said. He also called upon young black girls to take up careers in law, in order to fight against injustices such as racism and abuse. “Where is our care? What has gone wrong with our nation? Why have we become so numb to the tragedies that take away our children?” Mabuza asked, as he spoke about the death of 5-year old Lumka Mkethwa who died after falling into a pit latrine at her school. He also spoke about the improvements that needed to be made to ensure children have adequate transport systems in place to avoid walking long distances to school. The ceremony saw Mabuza start the day at the wreath-laying ceremony at the Sharpeville memorial site. https://twitter.com/GovernmentZA/status/976367103191212032 https://twitter.com/GCISMedia/status/976354030665465856 “We have many questions to ask ourselves. Our country is desperately in need of renewal. It requires that we all pause, think and reflect on our journey. We must begin to do things differently. We must be like those who died in Sharpeville. For rights that we have today, they all come with responsibilities,” he said. Mabuza also addressed the sudden “resurgence of racism” which has gripped the country. “Today South Africa also joins the nations of the world to mark the United Nations international day for the elimination of discrimination. We are called upon to advance human rights, inclusion and unity. We condemn the resurgence of racism in our society. It is an indictment on all of us after many years of Sharpeville. We still witness racial attacks, racial remarks amongst ourselves,” he said. Mabuza said that racist comments were heard from factory floors to boardrooms, and that this needed to come to an end. “To succeed, we must all start from the standpoint that people are born with inherent dignity,” he said as he called on government and communities to work together in order to move forward as a united nation.