Parliament and the Section 9 institution set up to oversee religious freedom are at loggerheads over how religious organisations should be governed. The Parliamentary committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs wants the religious sector to be self-regulated, but the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities (CRL) wants legislation set up to hold religious leaders accountable for their actions. The commission submitted a report on the commercialisation of religion and the abuse of people’s beliefs systems following an investigation into the Mancoba Seven Angels Church in Ngcobo. The commission recommended that religious individuals be regulated under a “legislated peer review mechanism”. Thoko Mkhwanazi-Xaluva, chairperson of the CRL, said the commission would like for individuals in religious communities to be regulated and not the religions themselves. “We are very worried about that because them regulating themselves would be much easier,” said the portfolio committee chairperson, Mzameni Mdakane. Mdakane said the point on which Parliament and the commission couldn’t agree was who would be regulating the religious leaders. The committee suggested the religious leaders hold each other accountable independently. “The [religious] sector must regulate itself and draw up a code of conduct,” said Mdakane. Mdakane maintained that, at the end of the day, the commission accounted to Parliament. “They are overkilling themselves on one issue. Their recommendation are just recommendations. Parliament will take these recommendations and do its work,” he said. Last Wednesday, five policemen were shot and killed at the Ngcobo police station. This was followed by a shootout between police and alleged Mancoba Seven Angels Church leaders, and the discovery of children being kept at the church. The CRL commission has been engaging with the parliamentary committee since last year and said it flagged the Mancoba Seven Angels Church as concern and needed immediate intervention. “We knew something was happening in Ngcobo but we had no powers to deal with it. We could only rely on the legislation being fast-tracked to enable other religious leaders [to assess the situation],” said Mkhwanazi-Xaluva. It is for this reason the commission said a legal framework that governs the self-regulation of religious organisations was necessary. As a result of the impasse with Parliament, the commission said it would be approaching the Constitutional court to clarify its powers as an organisation. “The Constitution is very clear – we are not the police, we can’t police people; we can only recommend and report,” said Mkhwanazi-Xaluva. She added that the law also needed to look at strengthening the Nonprofit Organisations Act and the Income Tax Act to ensure registration and taxation of religious practitioners and institutions. “What we’re hearing is that there are many others like this in the country,” she said. The commission has called on the public to alert them about similar “formations” to the Mancoba Seven Angels Church.