Ignorance is a free burden and the powers that be have, time and time again, demonstrated exactly that. We are either led by non-leaders or we are not led – either way the effect is the same. This is the realisation I came to during yet another joyous matrimonial celebration in the heart of Mbombela, where Daughter of Mlombo and Son of Makuba were promising each other forever things in the shadows of the beautiful mountains of that capital of ours. With the preliminary “I dos” done and dusted and the dance floor opened even to those with two left feet, the amber nectar of the gods calibrating logic, Son of Nkwanyana, the Mduduzi of Etshodo, let it be known that he had read in the woke media that our former presidential handlers, the Guptas, had plans to fleece another R1 billion from the province of Supra above. Apparently the Jacob of Nkandla will be resuming his old hobby of frequenting courts. The latest to be added to his growing list of offensive credentials is a R1 million kickback he allegedly received to keep on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Minister Senzeni Zokwana. What kind of president sells ministerial positions for only R1 million? I know all ministerial positions are sold but a mere R1 million? Indeed ignorance is a free burden. Anyway with the brown-bottled brew kicking in and the dance floor getting busier, Son of Mongale, the Willow of Sofaya, who demonstrated that his two left feet were not to be undermined, said that Safa boss, Son of Jordaan, was facing a rape charge. Jordaan, who seems to be president for life at Safa house, will be heading to court to face the charges. With the bottoms of the bottles nearing and the devil called sobriety becoming obscure, Daughter of Mlombo, the Busi of Tshwane, who is the sister of the bride, let it be known that apparently the rich North West Bakgatla Ba Kgafela clan may lose control of its own kitty. Daughter of Mlombo also said she heard over the wireless that Thulas Nxesi wanted to get rid of the Independent Development Trust board for not not doing what he didn’t ask them to do. As the night got younger, the sun threatening to show its face over the hilly KwaNyamazane and the throats well soaked in the clever barley brew of the ancestors, it was time that the mountains of Thaba Tshweu called me back to my shack castle in my Skomplaas, where Konkodi’s Tavern had commissioned me to preside over another ancestor appeasing session. With my drinking talents procured by that cheapskate Konkodi, my kind-hearted self headed to that poorly maintained shack he called a tavern. On the way, Son of Nkwanyana said that apparently the blue brigade of Mmusi Mymoney is heading to an elective conference and that former black man is not being contested. Obviously he didn’t get the memo that being black will be fashionable soon when the land arrives. Son of Mokone, the Silas of Lebowakgomo, who tried being celibate and failed dismally, said he bumped into mindless utterances of some rich non-entity in the streets of twitter and luckily Black Twitter which is the official ruling party of Msanzi put her on blast for control, just as it control all others. Arriving robed in my youthful gear of Dickies and Chuck Taylor for the august occasion, true to his ignorant nature, Konkodi and his now official worse-half Sister Bettinah, only had two cases of SAB’s finest brown-bottled brew. Needless to say it was obvious why his unimpressed gods blessed him with such a partner for his bedside antics. With the meagre offering nearing its end and obviously Konkodi’s own ancestors not nearly half as impressed according to my throat, the mediocre tavern owner mumbled that apparently the EFF of Malema are running the country instead of Ramaposer. Needless to say he was too soaked in his own cheap stock to see he was stating things we as Asphuzeni Stokvel had long known.