British musician Corinne Bailey Rae’s demeanour is often interpreted as meek, but when you talk to her – even over the phone – her assertiveness is unquestionable. The singer, songwriter and producer is preparing to blow away her South African fans when she performs at the Cape Town International Jazz Festival on March 23 and 24. The last time Bailey Rae performed in the country was during the 46664 concert in 2007. She said she was excited about her upcoming performance and still had fond memories of the last time she was here. “The audience was huge,” the singer said. “There was a rotating stage and I remember the venue lighting up when the audience took pictures.” However, Bailey Rae said she was slightly concerned about how she would be received when she came back with new melodies. She spoke affectionately about meeting her fans in person, whether it be at the airport, in a café, on the street or at her shows. The Leeds-born musician said meeting new people was just as fulfilling as performing “I often find myself having deep and emotive conversations with people.” She said when she meets people and talks openly about her music, she is given the same transparency in return. “It’s like a mutual exchange.” Bailey Rae described each of her performances as a defining moment. “Every time you go on stage, you want to prove yourself because you are in front of a new audience.” She said her self-titled debut album released in 2006 was conversational while her second album, The Sea, was filled with guitar riffs and live drum recordings. The album was also a tribute to her indie music roots. Her third album, The Heart Speaks in Whispers, is an exploration of different sounds. The album was released six years after The Sea. She said she was led by her intuition when she recorded her third album and only put pen to paper when the words came to her. The singer said Push On for the Dawn, a song on her latest album, best described her. Bailey Rae said the song is about moving away from the darkness towards light, perseverance and gratitude. “Every day is a new beginning. Every day is a chance to start again. Till time descends like a curtain, calling. It’s the end,” read some of the lyrics. Asked how she would describe her life, she said: “I’m in a position of gratitude and I’m enjoying it.” The musician said she was writing music for television and film productions. Bailey Rae’s cover of Coldplay’s The Scientist was featured in Fifty Shades Darker, a 2017 erotic romantic drama directed by James Foley. She has also worked with rapper and producer Tyler, the Creator on his song Boredom. The upbeat single is about the rapper’s desire to escape the tedium of everyday life. “I’m doing lots of collaboration this year,” said Bailey Rae. Catch Corinne Bailey Rae at the Cape Town International Jazz Festival’s Kippies stage on March 24 at 8.45pm. The festival will be hosted at the Cape Town International Convention Centre.