For the past few years, former ANC communications manager Khusela Diko spent most of her time fielding endless calls from the media. But these days Diko, President Cyril Ramaphosa’s newly appointed spokesperson, mostly receives calls from ordinary South Africans instead of journalists. Most of the calls are either complaints from the public about poor service delivery or offers of assistance from businesspeople. “What I can tell you is that people look up to the president,” says Diko. “This will probably surprise you, but about 80% of the calls I get are from people who are reaching out to offer help.” Her phone rings several times in the course of our interview on the veranda of the Protea Fire and Ice Hotel in Cape Town, where the ANC held its national executive committee meeting this weekend. Just weeks before Ramaphosa called Diko, she and a group of lobbyists were reeling from the fact that ANC delegates had excluded her from the party’s highest decision-making body. “I need to see you,” Ramaphosa beckoned on the other end of the line. Five days before Ramaphosa reshuffled his Cabinet, an anxious Diko dropped everything she was doing at Luthuli House and made her way to the Union Buildings. She was caught completely off guard when her political career took a different direction. “I was so anxious. Ramaphosa said he wanted a dynamic link between the ANC and the presidency,” recalls Diko. “I don’t think it was easy for him to come to that decision because one has to have a lot of faith in someone before they entrust them with such a huge responsibility.” Diko insists she would not be where she is today had it not been for the support she received from her comrades in the ruling party, members of the ANC Women’s League and Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga. The daughter of former judge president Themba Sangoni – who was part of a law firm with human rights lawyer George Bizos and political activist Dumisa Ntsebeza – Diko says she embarked on a journey of self-discovery that led her back to church. Born in Mthatha, Eastern Cape, Diko was raised in a Christian family. “I needed to find my bearings and could only do that through faith,” she says. Although Diko married into a family with strong traditional beliefs, her mother-in-law always reminds her how important it is to be a prayer warrior. She attributes her resilience and strength to the values instilled in her by her grandmother Lungilwe Mphahlwa and her mother Masivuye Sangoni, who did her best to raise her and her two siblings while doubling up as a teacher. Diko has a BCom and is currently studying law. Her phone rings mid-conversation and she apologises profusely before she picks up. It turns out her husband, King Thandisizwe Diko – who she affectionately refers to as “baby” – is on the other end of the line. Despite her busy schedule and the fact that they are kilometres apart, she steals a moment to finalise bookings for a trip he is undertaking and asks why he has not boarded his plane yet. As if being the president’s spokesperson is not strenuous enough, Diko has to juggle her roles as a big sister, a mother to her nine-year-old son Amandla, a wife and queen of the amaBhaca ethnic group. However, Diko has no royal ambitions and is reluctant to speak of her claim to the throne. “I don’t believe I qualify to be mother of a tribe.”