“You lack credibility‚ I want to know if yourself‚ you’ve been rehabilitated since you were part of the premier league‚ the rot of the past Zuma administration. How are you going to champion moral regeneration?” These were the words uttered to deputy president David Mabuza by Agang SA MP Andries Tlouamma that got him booted out of the National Assembly. Mabuza was addressing MPs in his maiden question and answer session on Tuesday when Tlouamma questioned his ability to lead the moral regeneration programme. The sole MP of Agang, Tlouamma refused to retract his words after National Assembly Deputy Speaker Lechesa Tsenoli numerously requested him to do so. “I’m not casting an aspersion [on Mabuza], it’s true. It’s unfortunate that you’re not a good example of a moral leadership,” Tlouamma said. The premier league refers to a group of ANC premiers from Mpumalanga‚ the Free State and the North West that were close to former president Jacob Zuma, fiercely campaigning for Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma to succeed him at the party’s elective conference in December last year. “Honourable member you are worse … you’re worse than I thought. You (should) withdraw that remark‚ ask your question and sit down‚” Tsenoli demanded. But Tlouamma did not let down. “Deputy Speaker‚ I don’t know between you and me who’s worse. It’s true, he can’t lead moral regeneration. He even failed in Mpumalanga as a premier,” Tlouamma said, speaking over Tsenoli. He was then ordered to leave the House after refusing to withdraw his remarks. Earlier, DA MP John Steenhuisen asked Mabuza how he would use his position to uncover who and what was behind political assassinations in Mpumalanga. “I think honourable members must do the right thing‚ otherwise we must avoid a situation where we are going around casting aspersions against people without any due process. “This I take it‚ is just a process to harm their names and their character. But I take it that the law enforcement agencies in our country must do their work without our hindrance,” Mabuza said, with MPs yelling “who did it?” in the background. On the matter of gender-based violence, the IFP’s Liezl van der Merwe asked if the ANC took women’s issues seriously seeing that they appointed Bathabile Dlamini as the Minister of Women in the Presidency. “The appointment of ministers and my appointment is the prerogative of the president. I agree with the fact that we have not done enough to deal with women issues. This is our collective responsibility,” Mabuza said.