It’s been a rollercoaster ride for more than 100 parastatal workers who were dismissed, then after a favourable court ruling were expecting backpay and their jobs back, only to have the company tell them they weren’t on the list. But it looks like the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa workers will finally get their money. Prasa Cres, a division of Prasa, on Thursday finally resolved a stalemate it had reached with 112 of its former workers fired from the division as part of the more than 700 workers dismissed by Prasa five years ago. A landmark Constitutional Court victory by members of the National Transport Movement saw the court instruct Prasa to reinstate all the fired workers and pay the money due to them from the time they were dismissed. Most of the Prasa divisions complied with the ruling and processed the back payments awarded by the court to the fired workers. This was followed by arrangements being made to start the smooth reabsorption of the fired workers as promised by Prasa soon after the landmark ruling. “We understand that this will be a lengthy process but some of the workers have already undergone checkups, a promising sign that they will be reinstated,” said National Transport Movement national chairperson Ronnie Mokhine. He explained that while workers in other divisions were celebrating the backpay and the imminent reinstatement, workers at the Prasa Cres division were being given the run-around by the company’s management. “Last week, there was a verification process where Prasa Cres confirmed that all the names on the court list was indeed genuine, containing names of former employees fired and who should be reinstated. After this, they requested that these workers bring their proof of banking,” explained Mokhine. According to Mokhine and a group of former Prasa Cres workers gathered the division’s Braamfontein office on Thursday, the company made an about-turn and froze any payments to the workers. The company claimed that they were not on the list of workers earmarked for reinstatement and the awarding of backpay. When City Press contacted Prasa national spokesperson Nana Zenani on Thursday morning to enquire about the company’s sudden change of heart, she explained that she was unaware of the situation. Zenani then made an about-turn of her own and later that day confirmed that indeed Prasa Cres was consulting with its legal team in order to find a way forward. “The workers in question were not part of the list submitted to Prasa by the court instructing Prasa to reabsorb them with full benefits and backpay,” argued Zenani. After a brief meeting between management and the legal team the company announced, through Zenani, that all employees that successfully challenged their dismissal would, by the end of today, be placed on the payroll of Prasa. This included employees who were inadvertently not included on the payroll by the pay run of March. Zenani explained that the Prasa Cres employees who had thus far not been included in the payroll would be “paid as soon as practically possible starting from this afternoon”. Nkosinathi Sithole, a 42-year-old former cleaner who was fired from Prasa Cres, said the news did not give him any joy. “Last week we also had hope that we will finally earn a salary after spending the past five years destitute. Our spirits were raised after the company requested that we submit our banking details, but they [Prasa Cres] then told us that our names were not among those which the court advised Prasa to reinstate and back pay,” said Sithole. The former cleaner said he will only be happy once the money is in his account, “for now who is to say they won’t change their [Prasa Cres management] minds again.”   