The Freedom Front Plus (FF Plus) has outlined its plan to challenge the amendment of the Constitution to accommodate expropriation of land without compensation. The party claims the proposed amendment to the Constitution will strip everyone in the country of the right of ownership and that it will destroy South Africa’s economy. This comes after Parliament adopted the motion following MPs from both the ANC and the Economic Freedom Fighters voting in agreement, overwriting the Democratic Alliance and the FF Plus who were against the motion. The FF Plus has laid out the following plans to oppose this motion outside of Parliament: Information sessions The party is planning to host nationwide information sessions about the process of amending the Constitution and the implications of expropriating land without compensation. This will include discussions with various organisations, chambers of commerce and agricultural associations. The party calls on people to make as many submissions during these sessions to oppose the proposed amendment to the Constitution. READ: Land expropriation without compensation - What does it mean? Meeting with the president The FF Plus will request an urgent meeting with President Cyril Ramaphosa and hand over a “list of grievances” together with a signed petition. The petition is hosted online and has been shared on various social media platforms. Protest The party plans to stage a mass protest for the protection of South Africans’ right of ownership. International mobilisation The party said expropriation without compensation is a violation of Article 17 of the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, to which South Africa is a signatory. The leader of the FF Plus, Pieter Groenewald, will travel to Europe on March 21 to attend meetings with regard to this amendment. The party plans to liaise with European parliaments, governments, the United Nations, the African Union and the Southern African Development Community tribunal. READ: The great land return lie Expropriation fund The FF Plus will raise money to finance legal actions related to the process of amending the Constitution with regards to land expropriation without compensation and to assist landowners should land grabs take place.   