New developments in the Karabo Mokoena murder case have forced a postponement to the start of Sandile Mantsoe’s trial. The state and Mantsoe’s defence team reached an agreement in the South Gauteng High Court on Monday in what was meant to be the start of a 15-day trial for Mantsoe – who is charged with premeditated murder. Appearing before Judge Colleen Collis, Advocate Phakanwiswa Marasela – representing the state – said that “due to new developments in the case, the state and the defence have reached an agreement to request the court for a postponement of the trial.” Marasela requested that the new trial date be set for March 19. Sounds of “hah” broke out in what had been, until then, a quiet court room, attentively following what the state advocate was saying. Family members and friends were clearly unhappy with the request for a postponement. Collis, however, confirmed with the defence if they were in agreement with the state and, after they concurred, she ruled that the case be postponed to March 19, adding that the trial would still be allocated 15 days – as was originally scheduled. Mantsoe allegedly murdered and set alight his then girlfriend, Mokoena, of seven months. In his bail application, the court heard that it was possible that Mokoena was alive when Mantsoe doused her with petrol and acid before setting her alight. READ: Mantsoe denied bail Collis explained that Mantsoe, who was denied bail in June last year at the Johannesburg Central Magistrates’ Court, would be remanded in custody until the resumption of the trial. Mantsoe, who has already spent 10 months in prison, said he was aware of the new developments and did not object to the postponement. Together with the charge of murder, the accused faces charges of assault with the intent of causing grievous bodily harm as well as defeating the ends of justice. Before adjourning the hearing, Collis said two media houses had approached her court to request that the case be broadcast live but the defence team had argued that the media houses should send in formal requests and motivate why the case should be broadcast live. The defence said they would challenge any such request. Speaking after the hearing had been adjourned, the deceased’s visibly distraught mother, Lolo Mokoena, said: “I would like not to comment on the postponement or anything related to the case.” There was also no indication of what the “new developments” entailed.   