President Cyril Ramaphosa’s once-powerful ANC voting bloc in the OR Tambo region has fragmented just months after it was firmly united behind his campaign in December. The OR Tambo region, which is the second biggest in the ANC after the eThekwini region in KwaZulu-Natal, has seen those – once acquaintances ahead of the provincial conference in the Eastern Cape and the ANC national conference – turning against one another. So highly contested is the region that even provincial executive committee (PEC) members are believed to have an interest in who becomes its regional chairperson between the two main line-ups led by current chairperson Xolile Nkompela, who is seeking re-election, and acting regional secretary Mesuli Ngqondwana, who wants to be chairperson. Nkompela, also vice-president of the SA Football Association, and Ngqondwana, mayor of the Nyandeni local municipality, were strong supporters of then deputy president Ramaphosa who was contesting to be president against Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma. The two regional leaders also supported the campaign for Eastern Cape provincial ANC chairperson Oscar Mabuyane to be elected at the violent elective conference last year. OR Tambo region was the first region to pronounce its support for Ramaphosa even before the formal lobbying processes were opened, through Nkompela. But now comrades have turned against one another with a frustrated Ngqondwana writing to ANC provincial secretary Lulama Ngcukayithobi and party secretary-general Ace Magashule, claiming Nkompela was at the centre of sabotaging processes for the regional conference. The regional conference of OR Tambo should have sat by Saturday, a deadline that was imposed by the party’s national executive committee (NEC). The regional conference was supposed to have been held from August 23 to 25 but by Thursday (August 30) it had not taken place and there was no clarity on whether the OR Tambo region would convene and meet the organisation’s deadline because some branch general meetings (BGMs) still had to sit and others had to be rerun. Ngqondwana, in the letter dated August 22 and seen by City Press, titled “report on the sabotaging of the organisational processes”, singled out his nemesis Nkompela and various branch secretaries for intentionally trying to prevent democratic processes. “REC [regional executive committee] is coordinating the frustration of the process. The regional chairperson Cde Nkompela has said it boldly in an REC meeting that he has instructed ‘his’ branches not to participate in the process. He has made an unequivocal declaration that he is responsible for BMGs not convening, even though the REC had taken a decision to start conference preparations,” read the letter. Ngqondwana in his letter called for “stern action” to be taken on the individuals who contributed to the destabilisation of the organisation process. He wanted those responsible for the collapse of BGMs to be disciplined. On Thursday the NEC held a special meeting to deliberate the fate of former North West premier Supra Mahumapelo. Although this issue was top of the agenda, regional conferences which are failing to comply with the cut-off date of August 31 were believed to also be on the agenda. ANC national spokesperson Pule Mabe and provincial secretary Ngcukayithobi – who both sit on the NEC – could not be reached for comment on Thursday. A source within the ANC and in the Ngqondwana camp said the Nkompela group was trying to delay the process and ensure the regional conference did not sit so that a regional task team (RTT) could be appointed to run the affairs of the region. “The problem is that they do not have numbers to win the conference hence they are playing these games. “What they want is that when the term of the current leadership ends in September, their people would be appointed in the RTT and exclude Ngqondwana and his supporters,” said the source, who did not want to speak because he did not have the authority to do so. Ngqondwana confirmed to City Press on Thursday that he had written to the provincial secretary Ngcukayithobi and party boss Magashule. He refused to be drawn into discussing the contents of the letter. Nkompela disputed that he wanted to delay the regional conference sitting and that was intentionally sabotaging it. “I have seen the letter. There is no such. “I was among the people who said let us go to an early conference. I cannot then turn around and say branches of the ANC must not hold their branch general meetings because it’s in their power to do so, it is not the power of the regional chairperson,” Nkompela said.