Few of us who have not experienced one can imagine the debilitating effects of a stroke, particularly at only 52 years of age. The loss of self, of independence, of dignity and the longing to return to a normal life. When I was two years old, my father and mother asked me what I wanted for my next birthday. “A little sister,” I said and, shortly after my third birthday, Tselane was born. Throughout my life, my parents reminded me that she was my “birthday present”. The implication was that I had a responsibility to look after her, which I took seriously. For most of our lives, my older sister Tembi, Tselane and I were exceptionally close, despite being at convent schools. I started attending a Franciscan convent at the age of seven and Tselane joined me when she was six. Throughout our adult lives – pre and post our parent’s passing, in exile and upon our return – I have endeavoured to be there for her on the numerous occasions when she, as an actress, was financially distressed. I took great pride after my father’s death in supporting my dear mother financially. She was often giving Tselane money and several times said that she was not concerned about Tembi nor myself, but about Tselane and how she would be my “burden and responsibility” after my mother was gone. I thought often about those words when my sister, at the age of 52, had that awful stroke, especially because our previously close relationship had broken down some years before. I was phoned one evening and told: “Your sister is in tears in the lobby of the Hyatt Regency hotel and has been evicted from her B&B due to unpaid bills.” I sent my driver to collect Tselane and he reported that she was unwell. She was seen by my GP, who, after examining her, told her that she was about to have a stroke and that she should proceed immediately to hospital. She did not. As predicted, the following day, Tselane had a stroke and, having no medical aid, was rushed to Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital. I moved her to Netcare Milpark Hospital, where she received medical care from specialists and staff who were the best I have ever encountered – better even than those in Harley Street, London, who had cared for my father after his stroke. After the stay in Milpark Hospital and rehabilitation centre, I sent her to a Christian retreat called Alon Farm in Tzaneen to recuperate, where she received ongoing physiotherapy. Even at R32 000 per month, it was cheap compared with Milpark. They later reduced the bill to R24 000 per month. Since Tselane left Alon, I have continued to send her funds regularly. Of course, no one can dictate how the money she receives is spent, or at what rate. Despite the sacrifice, it is important to me that my sons have an example to follow should their sister ever be in need. Last week’s article, “Tambo daughter ‘dumped’ by ANC” (City Press, August 26 2018), saddened me, and the phrase “I don’t have a brother” cut to the quick. I expect no fawning gratitude from my sister and don’t receive any. She is not the ANC’s responsibility, she is mine. The ANC kindly and nobly stepped in when I could no longer bear the burden alone. I will continue to do what I can, and often wish I was in business instead of the arts. It is a torrid time for Tselane, which has combined with a bad period for my heritage business. Yes, she has a brother, however imperfect. Our family all wish the best for her, and I have done my best. - Dali Tambo via email