Minister of Public Works Thulas Nxesi has likened arson attempts on the Civitas Building in Tshwane this week to that of a smear campaign in the name of attempts at covering up state capture. Nxesi, who was commenting on a double arson attempt this week, inferred that ministers who had been speaking out against state capture were being targeted. “We are now in the era of what Minister [Pravin] Gordhan calls ‘Bell-Pottinger Phase 2’ – where individuals and ministers seen to be fighting state capture and corruption will be targeted or smeared,” he said. “We are bound to suspect a hidden hand at work here. Are we witnessing new tactics in the ‘fight-back’ by state capture forces – which Minister Gordhan talks about? After all, part of state capture involved elements within the security apparatus – also suspected of being responsible for attacks on organisations seen to be fighting corruption,” he said. Nxesi also denied that the Civitas building was a death trap, but took responsibility for the current state that the Tshwane building was in. Nxesi and Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi addressed the media on Friday afternoon. They spoke about the issues that the building, which houses the offices of the national department of health, had faced. Nxesi confirmed that there were two attempts of arson on the building this week – the latest occurring on the 14th floor on Thursday afternoon. “Poor maintenance, in part, resulted in the malfunctioning of the air-conditioning, in particular. "As a result, employees – quite legitimately – protested their working conditions. However, we strongly reject the sensationalist headlines suggesting that the department of health’s Civitas building is a death trap because the building has never been declared uninhabitable by all appropriate and authorised institutions that undertook an assessment of the building,” Nxesi said. Some of the grievances that workers raised over the past few months included the ventilation system, which Motsoaledi said should be looked into, but should not be reason enough to compromise the safety of others in the building. Motsoaledi also called on Nxesi to appoint a full-time engineer to be placed at the building, to ensure the oversight of the functioning of the building facilities. “I’m demanding that public works put a full-time engineer in that building specifically whose job every day, when the person comes in, is to look at this system,” Motsoaledi said. Nxesi insisted that the building had in place five measures for fire safety, including smoke detectors and an integrated sprinkler system. He also added that the department was dealing with potential acts of sabotage that formed part of a “concerted criminal campaign”. Apparently when contractors return to air-conditioning units to repair them wires had been cut. “As I said, it is a time for extreme vigilance by all of us. But it must not be allowed to distract us from the primary task of service delivery, particularly for the health department which is charged with the mammoth task of delivering quality healthcare to all. "It is the responsibility of public works to support them in this,” Nxesi said. Meanwhile the Public Servants Association, which had been highlighting the poor state of Gauteng government buildings, on Thursday said that it would be opposing the health department’s interdict forcing the workers to work in the building, after the department of labour declared the building unfit for people to occupy.