Thembinkosi Ngoma has survived at least three near-death experiences. The secretary of Parliament’s portfolio committee on communications, and the man who helped bring us former public protector Thuli Madonsela, laughs non-stop as he relates his 22-year journey from security guard to an honours degree graduate. Last Monday, the 41-year-old graduated with honours in linguistics from the University of Western Cape (UWC). But it’s a miracle he has made it this far. His tale of twists and turns in his varied career began after finishing matric in 1995 at Luhlaza High School in Khayelitsha, Western Cape. “I had stayed with my uncle after my mother left with three of my siblings in 1991. In 1995, at the end of my matric year, my uncle decided to move back to the Eastern Cape. “When I was in Standard 5 [Grade 7], I was among the province’s top pupils academically, excelling in maths and accounting. I received a bursary for the rest of my high school years from the African Scholars’ Fund,” he said. “But I couldn’t study further because I had no money, so I had to fend for myself and I found an opportunity in the security industry.” His first job at Vikings Security was also his first brush with near-death. “I didn’t have any experience or security training but they took me on the spot. I was given a uniform and driven 50km to a forest-like area, and for five days I was left there alone to guard a generator. I was left with only 5l of water and 5l of petrol, and had to make my own boma-like shelter,” he said. Ngoma quickly got his wits about him, but quit the very day he was relieved from his duty. Soon he was appointed at another security company and was stationed at a school in the gang-ridden area of Belhar in Cape Town. This time he was armed with a gun and boerboel dog named Wagter, which soon turned on him and bit him because it could understand commands only in Afrikaans. “As you can imagine, in 1996 I was guarding a high school where most of the matrics were older than I was. I was bullied by some of them and not taken seriously. In one incident, two guys from a gang jumped over the school fence and tried to kill me in a gang-style initiation of a new member,” he said. But, fortunately for Ngoma, the initiate gained a conscience and revealed the plan to him, even buying beers for them to share after aborting the mission. But his survival came with a condition – he couldn’t work in the area anymore and was escorted to the train station to leave and never return. In 1999 he applied to work as a guard at the Reserve Bank in Cape Town, but in 2003 he came face to face with another brush with death. A colleague, suffering from depression, pulled a gun on him after he asked to share his cigarette. That was the last straw for Ngoma and the security industry – and so began his journey back into academics. He enrolled for a BA in Political Science at UWC. After completing his degree in 2006 he attempted his honours in 2007, but the death of his grandmother left him desolate. “Luckily I got an internship in Parliament and was on a six-month programme. After that, because my supervisors saw potential in me, I was on a contract and would serve three to four months at a time. In August 2009 I was called back in to be part of the ad hoc committee to nominate a person for appointment as Public Protector. I even remember calling Thuli to tell her she had been nominated,” he said. Ngoma credits his lecturer, Professor Zannie Bock, for encouraging him to return to his studies and not give up on his goal of attaining an honours degree. Last week he reached his goal. But that’s not the end of the road – he’s also supporting four high-school pupils from Philippi, Cape Town, through the same African Scholars’ Fund that supported him. From his own salary he also supports two pupils from Nyathela Senior Secondary School in Sterkspruit in the Eastern Cape. “I’ll never forget where I come from and that’s why I believe in giving back. I’ve been blessed with a wife and two children and I’ve also invested a lot in my kids’ education to make sure they have the best possible opportunities available to them.” Ngoma said he will be registering for a master’s degree next year with UWC.