A high court judge on Monday issued an order to halt the R2.1 billion claim brought against 10 former African Bank directors and the bank’s former auditor Deloitte and Touche by the bank’s former empowerment partners. “The first to eleventh defendants’ [the directors and Deloitte] exceptions on both claims … respectively, are upheld,” Judge Letty Molopa wrote in a ruling of which City Press has a copy. Exceptions are aimed at trying to block the summons served on them by the plaintiffs from getting a full court hearing. By holding the exceptions of the former African Bank directors and Deloitte, the judge effectively halts the R2.1 billion claim unless the former empowerment partners appeal today’s ruling. The African Bank’s former empowerment partners are Hlumisa and Eyomhlaba, which together have 13 000 shareholders. “The plaintiffs are granted a period of 30 days from date of the upholding of the exceptions to amend their particulars of claim if so advised,” Molopa wrote in a 54-page ruling. “The plaintiffs are ordered to pay the costs of these exceptions, including the costs of two counsel in respect of the first to 10th defendants, and two counsel in respect of the 11th defendant. The plaintiffs are ordered to pay the first to tenth defendants’ costs of the first exception,” the judge added. The former directors filed three exceptions against the case brought by the plaintiffs, and in its response Deloitte filed two exceptions against the plaintiffs’ case. The exceptions were argued before Molopa on November 7 and 8 last year in the North Gauteng High Court in Pretoria. The former directors of Abil and African Bank who are being sued are former chief executive Leon Kirkinis, along with Nithiananthan Nalliah, Mojankunyane Gumbi, Mutle Mogase, Nomalizo Langa-Royds, Nicholas Adams, Samuel Sithole, Antonio Fourie, Robert Symmonds and Morris Mthombeni. The Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors has charged two partners at Deloitte and Touche with misconduct related to the financial statements they signed off on at African Bank Limited and its holding company, African Bank Investments Limited, before the entities were placed under curatorship. The disciplinary hearing into the charges resumed today at a hotel near Pretoria.