It’s (almost) official. DJ Zinhle and rapper AKA are back in each other’s arms. A week ago the couple was seen all loved up and cosy in the VIP section of Moloko Club in Tshwane. AKA, whose real name is Kiernan Forbes, performed for a jam-packed crowd at the popular nightclub in Hatfield. DJ Zinhle Jiyane was by his side the whole time at the nightspot that claims to be for the “beautiful, rich and famous”. “They came together with bodyguards and spent the entire night looking smitten with each other in the VIP section,” said one partygoer who attended the gig last Friday night. “There is no doubt that they are head over heels in love. It is evident they are more than co-parenting. I am just happy for them; they deserve to be happy.” Another source told City Press this week that the two appeared to be in love. But they have not announced any reconciliation publicly. “They don’t owe anyone an explanation. If they decide to be together, who are we to judge?” he asked. This is not the first time Jiyane is supporting the father of her baby daughter, Kairo. But, of late, they have been spending a lot of time together. A month ago they were spotted getting cosy and hugging at the Taboo Night Club in Sandton. But, even though they have been spotted together on more than one occasion, the two vehemently denied that they had rekindled their romance.  But, in a subsequent interview with City Press, Jiyane dropped a hint, saying she would like to work with Forbes on her new project and for him to be her musical director. But, questioned about whether the two were back together, her response was: “There is nothing there.” Their “reunion” comes at a time when their careers are blossoming. Jiyane was recently announced as a resident judge on Season 5 of the SABC DJ talent show, 1s and 2s. Jiyane said she has always wanted to be part of the show and was over the moon when she landed a role in it. This week she again declined to comment on her private life, referring all questions to her manager, Jessica Porter, who declined to comment. “I can’t comment on that because AKA is the father of Zinhle’s child so they might be seen together from time to time,” said Porter. Meanwhile, Forbes is officially launching AKA Beam World, powered by Vodacom, on Tuesday. The app will allow his fans an inside look at his life and career. An angry Forbes’ manager Tshiamo Letshwene said he should not be dragged into AKA’s personal life. Forbes and his former manager Prince “Costinyo” Nyembe had a recent fallout, said reports this week. But Costinyo said that, as in many other industries, business partners fight all the time, but it did not mean there was any bad blood between him and Forbes. “He wants international territory hence he has anew team to help him to accomplish his dream. I couldn’t take his career further as he wanted me to do,” he said. Costinyo said he wasn’t angry with Forbes. The two started Beam Group together last year and have sealed big contracts. He said it was sad people “want to break them”. Little did they know that “we have come a long way”. “We have just shot the TV series, Cruz Vintage Black Vodka, and we have a lifetime contract with Cruz Watermelon Vodka. All these contracts are under Beam Group. So I am stuck with him for my entire life.”