The fallout over DA leader Mmusi Maimane’s ill-fated decision to stand as a candidate for the Western Cape premiership continues to haunt the party as two leaders have denied nominating him. DA insiders claimed this week that federal chairperson James Selfe had instructed Western Cape provincial chairperson Anton Bredell and deputy leader Albert Fritz to take the fall and say that they had requested Maimane to stand for the premiership candidacy. Maimane subsequently decided not to stand and Alan Winde was confirmed as the DA’s provincial candidate. Last week, when asked who had requested Maimane to stand, Selfe seemed to imply that it was the two Western Cape leaders, saying: “There were discussions around the possibility of the party leader, Mmusi Maimane, standing for Western Cape premier. These discussions were held with two senior Western Cape leaders – Anton Bredell, the Western Cape provincial chairperson and Albert Fritz, the deputy leader in the province. What was at issue was what was in the best interests of the people of the Western Cape and of the party,” Selfe said. “Mr Maimane was then approached and asked to consider the possibility of standing for the province’s top job. After giving the matter serious consideration, he subsequently informed the federal executive committee on Tuesday that it was not in the interest of the party’s national objectives for him to stand.” However, when asked on Friday if they had indeed requested Maimane to stand, both denied having ever done so. Fritz said: “I have no clue what you are talking about. I have absolutely no clue.” Responding via text, Bredell said: “I have not requested anybody to stand. I was part of the selection panel and it would have been inappropriate of me to ask any person to stand.” When asked if he had given the instruction, Selfe repeated that Western Cape leaders had been consulted and that the party had since moved on. “However, this is all now moot as a capable premier candidate, Alan Winde, will be taking on this task and will take the DA’s offer to the people of the Western Cape.”  In another plot twist in the premiership saga, City Press learnt this week that the selection panel had initially resolved on Winde, but later withdrew their recommendation of him to the federal executive. City Press understands that there were concerns about Winde being a white male, leading to the panel withdrawing their initial decision and opting instead to recommend provincial leader Bonginkosi Madikizela to the federal executive. However, in a meeting of the national managers committee which was held a day before the special federal executive meeting which made the final decision, Maimane is alleged to have told the group that he would not accept the Madikizela recommendation and, in essence, punish Winde for being white. The minutes of this meeting, including Maimane’s input, were then accidentally sent to members of the federal executive before being recalled. Meanwhile, the hunt for which party member leaked the information that Maimane was considering standing, is still on the go. When asked about the two recommendations, Selfe said: “Regarding the selection panel, section 10.3 of the nominations regulations allows the federal executive to approve or reject premier candidates proposed by the selection panel. “In this case, the federal executive considered the lists presented to them and the reasons provided by the selection panel to reorder the original list. They rejected these reasons. The selection panel reconvened and reverted to their original ordering of the candidates.” City Press has also learnt of a scathing letter written to the leaders of the party by a furious Madikizela, calling on them to call off the witch-hunt in which he is the prime suspect. In the letter, he speaks of being targeted by some in the party and of the processes which led to Winde’s appointment which, he says, were manipulated.    