Behind-the-scenes drama during the planning of the annual Mpumalanga Show ended up with Deputy President David Mabuza not showing up during its opening on Friday. The event, which started last year when Mabuza was still Mpumalanga premier, showcases the province’s offerings in agriculture, forestry, tourism, wildlife, mining and energy. The event had the full support of government when it started. However, this year preparations took a wrong turn when show director Themba Sigudla accused the provincial government, particularly Premier Refilwe Mtshweni, of withholding funds. According to Sigudla, the show has cost about R18 million, but government contributed nothing despite having promised R15 million last December. Sigudla then wrote to Mtshweni on August 24 informing her that she would not be allowed to introduce Mabuza, according to government protocol, who was expected to open and address the gathering. Mabuza kept participants waiting despite having confirmed a day earlier that he was going to attend. Mtshweni also did not attend after a meeting between the show’s organisers and provincial government’s protocol officials did not find a solution. Mtshweni’s spokesperson, Zibonele Mncwango, did not respond to written questions on the matter. Sigudla’s letter, which City Press has seen, informed Mtshweni that the chairperson of the show would introduce Mabuza. The letter further said that Mtshweni was welcome to attend in her personal capacity. It reads: “This letter serves to inform you that you will not be required to introduce the honourable Deputy President of South Africa Mr DD Mabuza on August 31 or to officially open the Mpumalanga Show on August 30 2018.” “A month before the show we were advised by e-mail, sent to a wrong address, that we will only receive R2.5 million, putting the show in severe financial distress after everything was ordered and supplied by vendors, agreements were drawn up with the Mataffin community, extra staff was employed to facilitate the show, e.t.c,” Sigudla wrote. Sigudla added that organisers followed government’s instruction and advertised “prolifically” on print and electronic media, billboards and social media. “[Owing] to the sudden financial constraints imposed on us, it became exceptionally difficult to produce the show without collapsing it. Should this have happened it would be a major embarrassment to ourselves, the government and the deputy president, who is the patron of the show and told us to fly high, which we certainly have,” Sigudla said. Mabuza’s spokesperson, Thami Ngwenya, was not available to comment about the deputy president’s no-show. The Mpumalanga Show started on Thursday and will end today.    