The goal of local businesses is to save VBS bank, which has more than 20 000 clients. Disgruntled clients of the controversial VBS Mutual Bank want the SA Reserve Bank (Sarb) to remove Nedbank as a facilitator in continuing efforts to repay thousands of the troubled bank’s retail depositors. Nedbank was appointed as facilitator by Sarb to repay retail deposits after VBS was placed under curatorship earlier this year. This was after it emerged that the bank’s executives and influential public and political figures looted the bank of millions through a complex spree that included massive loans to friends and relatives. But retail depositors organised under the Save VBS Bank Task Team now want Nedbank to return the money allocated to it for the purposes of repaying VBS depositors. They say this should be done “in preparation for normal banking processes to resume under administration until the bank [VBS] finds a good footing”. The Thulamela Business Forum, a member of the task team that represents 80 businesses in the Thulamela area, has filed a complaint with the office of the Public Protector, asking for its intervention. But spokesperson for the Public Protector, Oupa Segwale, said they do not have jurisdiction over the matter and have since referred it to Sarb. The task team, which includes the National African Federated Chamber of Commerce and Industry; civic and community organisations; stokvels; and business and trader forums, also wants Nedbank to donate to charity any profits it made as facilitator. The group was expected to march on Nedbank’s offices in Thohoyandou yesterday. In July, Sarb announced that it had secured a guarantee of R100 000 per retail depositor from National Treasury. The Sarb then appointed Nedbank to facilitate the repayments. Sarb said that, at the time, it considered proximity to depositors, cost structure, speed of execution, and the complexity of having multiple mediums, as well as the advice provided by the curator of VBS when deciding on selecting Nedbank as a medium for the repayments. But Mbulungeni Ntsieni, chairperson of the Thulamela Business Forum, said they were dissatisfied with how Nedbank had handled the process and would prefer that the curator oversee the process through VBS branches. He said their main goal was to save VBS, which boasts more than 20 000 clients, many of them business people, burial societies, stokvels and individuals in the former Venda homeland administration area in Limpopo province. “We are saying that the depositors should not suffer. The depositors didn’t do anything wrong. “The people who did something wrong are known and should be dealt with by the law,” said Ntsieni. The task team charges in its August report that “the appointment/selection of Nedbank as a facilitator shows clear signs of being nothing other than procedural”. It argues that the reasons given for appointing Nedbank are baseless, citing the cost of transactions and the smaller number of the bank’s outlets where VBS clients are concentrated. The task team wants a consultative process involving various stakeholders, including representatives of depositors, to be instigated to “provide for a more transparent transition”. They also want assurances that VBS will be properly restored and ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa to come and address the community to “provide assurance that the institution [VBS] will be assisted to come out of its woes in order for it to function normally”. The task team wants those implicated in the looting of VBS to be prosecuted and their assets expropriated by the Asset Forfeiture Unit. Limpopo provincial government spokesperson Phuti Seloba said a forensic investigation into VBS was continuing. The bank is also being investigated by the SAPS and Sarb. Seloba said the provincial government did not see the need to shut down the bank, saying it was a necessary institution providing a valuable service. But he said they wanted those found guilty of looting the bank to be dealt with harshly. By the time of going to print, the Sarb and Nedbank had not responded to requests for comment. – Mukurukuru Media 