Christians of South Africa president Pastor Derick Mosoana has welcomed without reservation Tuesday’s Constitutional Court ruling, which decriminalised personal cannabis consumption. Speaking to City Press on Wednesday, Mosoana celebrated what he described as a “victory for stoners”. “We welcome yesterday’s Constitutional Court ruling by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo on the decriminalisation of the use of dagga for private use. We were attacked yesteryear when we compared marijuana with moringa, aloe and other African herbs,” said Mosoana. According to the Faith Chapel SA pastor, his stance has always been clear: marijuana is a herb and its use is not the problem. The problem is the abuse and overuse of the plant. “Everything can be addictive if it is overused. Take sex for example. It is a natural thing but when engaged in excessively it could be addictive as well. The same goes for other African plants such as aloe,” argued Mosoana. READ: Alcohol and tobacco ‘more harmful’ than dagga The pastor, a former DA councillor in the Fetakgomo Local Municipality, said that when he called for the legalisation of marijuana he was “insulted by so-called pastors and many cowards who today celebrate with us, this mouth-watering judgment by the Constitutional Court”. The court on Tuesday upheld a Western Cape High Court decision decriminalising the possession of dagga in citizens’ private capacity. The state’s arguments on the limitation of the use of dagga went up in smoke as Zondo gave the green light for personal dagga consumption. “This judgment is a victory to those cancer patients who needed a daily dose of dagga juice or oil for survival. Parliament should prioritise plans to regulate the use of this African herb that has the potential of growing the economy,” said Mosoana. He also argued that should government legalise the use of the herb, this would create sustainable jobs and generate billions of rands in taxes – “billions to save South Africa from hazardous Chinese loans that threaten our independence and security”. Mosoana also thanked “the dagga couple” – Jules Stobbs and Myrtle Clarke – “for the fight well fought” in leading up to this ruling, as well as former member of Parliament Mario Oriani-Ambrosini who died fighting for this “good cause”. READ: Growing the green The pastor urged South Africans to exercise “caution, discipline and public respect when using this African herb” and promised to work closely with health researchers on the advantages of marijuana. ‘South Africa needs Christ in politics’ In that same breath, Mosoana also announced that his political days were not yet over and revealed that Cosa would be contesting the 2019 elections. “Taking into consideration the alleged state capture, and numerous service delivery protests in the country, we have come to the realisation that we cannot do it alone. We need Christ to turn things around. “I believe my party stands a good chance in the 2019 elections as it will be able to convert previously conservative Christian voters to vote for the party,” said Mosoana. Shortly after leaving the DA in 2015, Mosoana launched a political party, Sekhukhune Congress, which contested the 2016 local government elections. His party garnered 772 votes – small fry compared with the 870 015 votes obtained by the winners of the municipality, the ANC.   