The 21st Annual Isicathamiya Competition in The Playhouse Company’s Opera Theatre in Durban was a night of colour and sophisticated traditional dance moves. Mpumelelo Buthelezi captured the moment. Last weekend hundreds of traditional music and dance groups descended on the famous sunny seaside municipality of eThekwini to showcase their skills to the audience in The Playhouse Company’s packed Opera Theatre for the 21st Annual Isicathamiya Competition. However, there was no sight of sunny skies as it was pouring with rain, forcing some of the groups to rehearse in the soaking weather.  And the downpour did not deter fans who came to support their favourite groups. They sang, clapped and screamed in jubilation for their groups, which came from Gauteng, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal. Isicathamiya is an a cappella choral style of singing and dance moves developed by migrant Zulu men.  It was an all-night affair - from 6pm on Saturday to 6am on Sunday. Some of the choirs ended up sleeping in the corridors. More than 150 groups competed for the big prize of R200 000, in five categories: Top 20, Standard, Open, and Oswenka (Swanking) and Onobuhle (Beauty Queens).  It was not surprising that in their moves, they mostly mimicked South Africa’s Grammy award-winning group, Ladysmith Black Mambazo, whose roots date back decades. Three groups in particular stole the show and had supporters on their feet throughout their renditions. So it came as no surprise when Zulu Messengers, SA Action Boys and James Black Birds walked home with the top three awards of the night - R11 000, R9 000 and R8 000, respectively.  Oh! There was a goat on offer! It was presented to the best group chosen by the adjudicators. Umkhumbane A had the honour of taking home the goat. Johannesburg-based Sikhalo seAfrica, who made their second appearance at the annual show, left empty-handed once again. But Thobekani Mathe was not discouraged.  “The travelling was nice and we sang all the way from Johannesburg,” said Mathe. “We might not have won, but we take pride in singing Isicathamiya, as it is our tradition. We will be back next year and we are coming to win it.” Linda Bukhosini, the chief executive and artistic director of The Playhouse Company, said the event had surpassed their expectations and promised it would be bigger and better next year. “The Isicathamiya competition has a special place in my heart,” said Bukhosini. 