Zimbabwe is battling to contain a deadly outbreak of cholera that has so far claimed more than 27 lives, putting the spotlight on the country’s poor funding modalities for public health. This comes amid calls from development campaigners and partners of President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s new administration to take a fresh look at its priorities. A state of emergency was declared in Harare last Tuesday to help authorities cope with the situation. On Saturday public health workers at the Beatrice Road Infectious Diseases Hospital in the capital Harare told City Press the situation had started to improve, although there were “still more deaths” being recorded “every day”. They complained that their welfare was neglected and claimed that they had gone for four months without pay. Mnangagwa said in Bulawayo last Thursday that the situation was a top priority for government. Human rights campaigners argued that the government’s priorities were “misplaced” and that the health sector deserved more funding than any other. A Beatrice hospital employee said: “The response was late, but slowly the situation is improving. People are still dying and the figures are much higher than those announced. “The main problem is that people are coming to the hospital late and it becomes difficult for them to respond well to treatment. More awareness is needed.” Finance Minister Mthuli Ncube and Health Minister Obadiah Moyo, both appointed just more than a week ago, have been thrust into the deep end to find solutions for the health crisis, which experts say has for long been a ticking time bomb. Ncube and Moyo – starved of funds from government coffers to handle the situation – have resorted to the desperate measure of crowdfunding, which has laid bare the government’s funding shortfalls. Zimbabwe has been struggling to lift its economy since it started declining in the late 1990s. This has been impacting social service sectors such as health and hampering citizens’ access to health. The move to create a fund on the EcoCash mobile money platform has attracted sharp criticism from opposition politicians and other stakeholders. Charlton Hwende, a top advisor to main opposition MDC Alliance leader Nelson Chamisa, took to social media in response. “What kind of nonsense is this? Your government chartered a plane for Grace Mugabe to attend a funeral. Now 25 poor people have died and all you can do is crowdfund,” he said. Jonathan Moyo, a former cabinet minister under Mugabe’s administration and strong critic of Mnangagwa, said the bid to raise resources to handle the cholera outbreak was an admission of failure by the current administration. However, it appears that some Zimbabweans in the diaspora, including those in South Africa, are keen to contribute to a fund. Others said it was wrong for the government to raise money through crowdfunding as people were paying taxes. Zimbabwe’s formal employment rate is estimated at less than 20%. Nearly all of the government’s earnings are swallowed by recurrent expenditures owing to a bloated civil service workforce, which Ncube has been tasked to reduce. The ruling Zanu PF government and Chamisa’s MDC – which run most urban councils where the cholera outbreak is worsening – have traded accusations blaming each other for failing to take responsibility for the health situation. Harare mayor Herbert Gomba said as many as 4 000 people have been diagnosed with cholera and typhoid fever. “I have ordered, through council, the opening of all public toilets and assigned extra and well-trained staff to help maintain good hygiene in those toilets. “I have also asked the central government departments, residents, business and all stakeholders to pay up what they owe to the Harare city council to help in the efforts against cholera and typhoid,” he said. Earlier this year, Vice-President Constantino Chiwenga dismissed nurses from public health institutions after they embarked on strike action. This has worsened the response situation at public health facilities, especially in urban areas. The ministry of health’s permanent secretary, retired brigadier-general Gerald Gwinji, is appealing for the government to hire additional human resources. “The cholera and typhoid outbreaks are clear indications of poor water, sanitation provision and health policies in the country. One of the major challenges in combating these outbreaks is a shortage of the requisite human resources. The current staffing levels are at 50%, not because of a skills shortage but because of the freeze on recruitment,” he said in a letter to the Health Service Board this week. Corporates in Zimbabwe have also stepped up to the challenge and are helping to plug the government funding deficit for the cholera outbreak. Telecommunications group Econet made $10 million available, in contrast to central government’s advance of $1 million. The Zimbabwe Council of Churches said mission and church-run hospitals were ready to assist despite being underresourced. Rights campaigners are advocating for a complete overhaul of the water and sewer reticulation system in the most affected suburbs of Harare. Most Zimbabweans are still battling to prevent contracting the disease, which killed an estimated 4 000 people across the country in 2008. The current outbreak has spread to the second capital, Bulawayo, Chitungwiza and the Manicaland region, among others.