The Mining Forum of South Africa has called for the mineral resource director-general Thabo Mokoena to step down. The lobby group, which is also involved in a legal battle to have Lonmin’s mining licence revoked, penned a letter on Monday to both Mokoena and Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe requesting that Mokoena step down, citing gross incapacity and having been appointed by former minister Mosebenzi Zwane. The letter, which City Press has seen, urged Mokoena to step down because his appointment was questionable and the doubts raised at the time had now been allegedly confirmed. “Your appointment in office was due to the previous minister, Mosebenzi Zwane, of which his reputation and conduct are questionable and subject to investigations. There were many issues that were raised during your appointment in 2017, including: your inexperience and lack of knowledge in the industry due to lack of mining background and your lack of possession of any mining credentials or related experience,” the letter read. The letter also states a lengthy list of grievances allegedly caused by the Mokoena’s lack of capacity. The forum requested that he hand over a letter of resignation to Mantashe as soon as possible. It said it would “appreciate the appointment of a competent director-general who would restore and uphold the department’s credibility and fulfil its mandate, legal and constitutional obligations to South African citizens and in particular those directly affected by mining”.  The forum said that in any normal case, the goal of every appointment was to appoint a competent individual who would solve problems and bring about solutions. “You have failed to do so and in particular, problems facing the industry have worsened, so as the forum we don’t see the reason for you continuing being there at the department as the director-general. It is a waste of state resources and funds for you to continue,” the letter says. The forum’s president, Blessings Ramoba, said though Mokoena’s appointment was questionable because of inexperience in the sector, the organisation was incensed by his failure to perform. “There is a political will from the minister ... the problem is there is no capacity to execute,” Ramoba told City Press. The organisation joined a growing list of industry stakeholders who have previously called for Mokoena’s head. These include unions such as Solidarity, the National Union of Mineworkers and Cosatu. When he was appointed in March 2017, both the Democratic Alliance and the Chamber of Mines expressed concern and surprise at Mokoena’s appointment. Reacting to the call by the forum, Mokoena said that a formal response will soon be issued, and that Ramoba should instead raise issues he has with other stakeholders directly, as the forum “receives no material benefit”. “It is unfortunate that Mr Ramoba has chosen to use his position within that organisation to further his own interests and personal agenda, instead of advancing those of the communities he claims to serve. To threaten mines to get contracts for his personal benefit is not in the spirit of serving the communities,” Mokoena said. Mantashe’s spokesperson Nathi Shabangu said he was not aware of the letter.   