Employment decreased overall by 69 000 quarter-on-quarter, from 9.817 million in March to 9.748 million in June. The Statistics SA quarterly employment statistics released on Wednesday revealed that the industries largely responsible for this decline were the community services, mining and quarrying, manufacturing and transport industries. The community, social and personal services industries showed a quarterly decrease of 67 000 jobs, the manufacturing industry showed a decrease of 13 000 jobs, the transport, storage and communication industry. The mining and quarrying industry both showed a decrease of 2000 jobs in the second quarter. Statistics SA revealed that employment in the electricity, gas and water supply industry remained unchanged from the first quarter. The net quarterly decrease followed a decrease of 48 000 in the first quarter from December 2017 to March this year. Some industries also showed a decrease in gross earnings paid to employees in the same period. Statistic SA reported gross earnings paid to employees decreased by R5.2 billion in this quarter. This decrease was mainly attributed to the decreases in business services, mining and quarrying industries. Gross earnings paid to employees in the financial intermediation, insurance, real estate and business services industries showed a quarterly decrease of R12.4 billion in June compared with March. In the mining and quarrying industry, gross earnings paid to employees showed a quarterly decrease of R699 million in the same period. Apart from the annual increases in employment, there have been some quarterly increases as well. In the second quarter the wholesale and retail trade industry and the financial intermediation, insurance, real estate and business services industry both increased employment by increased by 7 000 and the construction industry by 1 000. The following industries showed these quarterly increases in gross earnings paid to employees: community, social and personal services by R3.5 billion; the transport, storage and communication industry increased by R2.3 billion, the construction industry by R188 million; the manufacturing industry by R570 million; the wholesale and retail trade industry by R1.14 billion; and the electricity, gas and water supply industry by R94 million.   