DA federal chairperson and Nelson Mandela Bay Metro Mayor Athol Trollip says he deserves a second term because of the role he has played in mediating internal issues across provinces and helping with fundraising. Currently involved in a battle for survival in the metro, Trollip looks beyond this and wants to help the DA be part of a coalition government after the elections next year. Trollip may not be everyone’s cup of tea, but he dismisses the notion that he is arrogant and a bully. “Arrogant and militant? Says who? I won’t respond to that unless you can reveal who says so. I’ve served as the provincial leader for 15 years and was elected and re-elected seven times. I doubt that would have happened if this was true. “I’m uncompromising and expect elected representatives to earn their salary by representing their constituents. I set high standards and try to lead by example. I’ve built my reputation on this. Marlon Daniels of the Patriotic Alliance told Gayton McKenzie recently that “sy mense vrek vir hom” [his people will die for him]. I take this as a compliment. Why don’t you ask those who work with me?” Trollip (54) is planning to work with the tiny Patriotic Alliance after the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) withdrew their support for him as mayor and moved to hold a vote in a motion of no confidence against him. “Patriotic Alliance leader Gayton McKenzie came to see me to say he could never support the removal of a mayor simply or crudely based on the colour of their skin. We both abhor racism. So we’ve used this as a platform to build relations.” Trollip says people enjoy his leadership because they know where they stand with him at all times. “I lead in a fashion that I’d like to be led. I set a lot of store by discipline, hard work and loyalty to our cause. I’m dedicated to our objective to build a party for all South Africans and want to play a leadership role in pursuit of that.” He adds value to the position, he insists. What about those taking him on for the position? “Anyone is free to contest any position at our congress. Why should contesting with me be an issue? I’ve contested various positions in the party and I’ve won some and lost some. That’s democracy.”