The money will be shared among 17 of the country’s 26 universities Brian Tebete dropped out of the University of the Western Cape (UWC) last year because he was homeless and could not find decent accommodation. A year later, government has finally approved a R1.1 billion grant to build residences and alleviate the housing backlog. Tebete was in his first year, studying towards a law degree. He could no longer sleep in the corridors of an abandoned office block called ResLife with 44 other stranded students. The desperate group occupied the building, a move university management considered illegal. He went home after the university issued a notice in May, instructing students to vacate the building. UWC said the City of Cape Town had declared the building unsuitable for habitation. City Press has learnt that five institutions did not qualify for a slice of the R1.1 billion the department of higher education and training had allocated to build residences in the 2017/18 academic year. They are UWC, the University of Cape Town (UCT), Stellenbosch University, the University of Limpopo and the Durban University of Technology (DUT). Unisa and three new universities – the University of Mpumalanga in Mbombela, Sol Plaatje University in Kimberley and Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University in Pretoria North – also did not receive funding. Unisa is a distance-learning institution, while the other three have their own grant funding dedicated to student accommodation. The remaining 17 of the country’s 26 universities were allocated the infrastructure and efficiency grant that Higher Education Minister Naledi Pandor had approved. Pandor told the vice-chancellors of the five universities why their institutions did not get grant funding. A source at UWC said the university was told they could not get funding because last year’s negotiations with the Western Cape provincial government over a land deal, which could have resulted in 2 680 beds being built, had not yet been concluded. At UCT, a source said the department found the university had not implemented projects that were funded in the previous year. A source at Stellenbosch University said the department found the university had not spent grants of R29.8 million for 2012/13 and 2014/15 and R30 million for 2015/16. A Limpopo University insider said the department could not allocate money because the feasibility study for development and financing of student residences at Turfloop campus had not been finalised. A source at DUT said the university had not implemented projects that were funded in the previous years. City Press learnt that Pandor warned those who had been allocated funding to submit plans by the end of June, detailing how they would spend the money. She expected universities to contribute between 10% and 50% of the cost of the accommodation projects, depending on the university’s financial position. According to sources, other conditions she imposed were that universities should not use the infrastructure money to finance shortfalls in other projects that were meant to provide accommodation for students and those that were funded in previous years. By Saturday, spokespersons for the five universities had not responded to questions from City Press. In a statement issued last Tuesday, Pandor said this year’s infrastructure funding grant was meant to complement a R1 billion grant released to 14 universities for student housing in March last year. She said her department recognised the need for dignified and affordable student accommodation across the higher education sector. “The government will continue to invest in accelerating the construction of affordable student accommodation. The huge investment we are making in living and learning environments that are supportive of student success is a clear indication of our commitment,” she said. She urged students to “express their activism by respecting and maintaining the existing facilities and accommodation while legitimately lobbying for improved accommodation”. UCT spokesperson Nombuso Shabalala confirmed that the university did not receive funding for last year, but denied that the reason was because they failed to spend the previous year’s budget. “There has been no call for infrastructure applications since 2012, but the universities have been asked to provide their maintenance plans and indicate their student housing backlog. UCT will be considered based on applications provided for the next cycle.” UWC interim spokesperson Cherrel Africa said the university cannot request additional funds until the issue of land availability is resolved with the Western Cape government. Stellenbosch University spokesperson Martin Viljoen said the department fully understands the complexities and realities of building in the Stellenbosch environment and did not consider the university to be at fault in any way. Viljoen said the department was aware of plans by the university to build a residence off the central campus in Stellenbosch. There were other innovative measures that were undertaken by the university to provide additional beds for students. “Pertinent logistical realities need to be taken into consideration particularly in Stellenbosch, building costs are much higher than in other parts of the country,” he said. Viljoen said there is not much space on campus “taking into account that the Stellenbosch Campus is an open campus intertwined with that of the town”. Any infrastructure upgrades must take into account specific local bylaws that the university needs to adhere to, making it hard to obtain planning permission for alternative building technologies.