Mark Lamberti has resigned as a director from the Eskom board. His resignation was tendered, and accepted, on Friday night. Lamberti said he made the “difficult” decision because he wanted to put the interests of Eskom, the board and the country above all else. He also stated that he could not, in good conscience, accept any compensation from Eskom and would return the fees paid to him because most of the Eskom board’s work to date had been preparatory. In his resignation letter, which he addressed to Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan, and chairperson of the Eskom Board, Jabu Mabuza, Lamberti said he was resigning “with an extremely heavy heart”. “This decision is motivated by my fiduciary duty to Eskom and my consistent and proven record of acting insofar as possible in the best interests of South Africa,” he wrote. On March 23, the South Gauteng High Court found that Lamberti, who was in 2015 the chief executive of Imperial Holdings, impaired the dignity of former employee Adila Chowan by referring to her as “a female empowerment equity candidate”. Following public outrage over his conduct, the public enterprises department said earlier this week that Gordhan was studying the ruling. The department said Gordhan had noted the judgment against Lamberti and was taking legal advice on the matter before deciding on what course of action to take. Lamberti cited the high court judgment as the reason for his resignation. He maintained that “while mistakes were made and there are important lessons to be learnt, there were no findings in the judgment of race or gender discrimination against [Associated Motor Holdings], Imperial or myself. “Despite this, there has been a mainstream and social media frenzy of generally inaccurate commentary. This is being fuelled by a political agenda and legally incorrect interpretations of the judgment, which have culminated inter alia in the most vitriolic defamation of my person. The most telling aspect of this is the call for the minister and indeed the president to remove me from the Eskom board,” the letter stated. The Economic Freedom Fighters had also joined in the call for his resignation. The party said his conduct had “humiliated, degraded and objectified Ms Adila Chowan”. Lamberti believed that the developments, and the threatened retaliatory actions, had reached a point where they might impinge on Eskom’s “tentative but essential” progress. He believed that he had a duty to prevent that as far as he could, and that his resignation could facilitate this. “As one who believes that President [Cyril] Ramaphosa is uniquely qualified to unite government, labour, business and civil society behind an inclusive growth agenda, my duty as a patriot is similarly to facilitate his progress by resigning,” he said.