We may think we’re fabulous, but South Africans’ nationality has been labelled “medium quality” by a global citizenship and residence advisory company. Our nationality scored 32%, and ranked 92nd out of 168 countries worldwide in the 2017 general Quality of Nationality Index (QNI) released this week. The Seychelles and Mauritius were the top two ranked nationalities in Africa, coming in at 49th and 53rd respectively, with South Africa in third place. Amanda Smit, a director at global advisory firm Henley and Partners, said the South African nationality was perceived to be better than other countries on the continental mainland. To arrive at the overall ranking, researchers used strictly quantifiable data to determine the opportunities and limitations that nationalities impose on individuals. They measured the value of the nationality inside the country of origin, including factors such as quality of education, life expectancy, healthcare and opportunities for personal growth. Factors relating to the external value of nationality also featured strongly in the rating, including the range and type of opportunities our nationality allows us to have outside of our home country, and our freedom to travel and settle elsewhere. “In the majority of circumstances, our nationality plays an important role in establishing a highly irrational ceiling for our opportunities and aspirations, reflecting the core aspect of being a national of some place, which is a random consequence of birth boasting no correlation with a person’s achievements, ideas, feelings, and desires,” researchers said. Smit said the perception of the quality of the South African nationality was low “because there are nationalities that highly exceed South Africa”. “These nationalities are in the top tiers that are mainly: High Quality, including China with a value of 41.4%; Very High Quality, with the US scoring 69.4%; and Extremely High-Quality, such as France with a score of 81.7%.” Smit said researchers based their calculations on data collected by leading international institutions and experts with impeccable reputations, including the World Bank, the UN and the International Air Transport Authority. “To assure the differences in quality among nationalities are understood well, the QNI divides nationalities into ‘quality tiers’. Nationalities that have a value of between 20% and 35% are Medium Quality nationalities,” said Smit. South Africa’s quality of nationality has dwindled over the past five years. “In 2012, South Africa was ranked 83rd with a score of 30.5%. Even though South Africa dropped ranking, that score has, however, increased to 32.8%. The drop in ranking is due to the other nationalities performing better and therefore exceeding South Africa.”  Smit said that, internally, South Africa’s economic strength is low and has been stagnant for the past five years, which would contribute to the low internal score. Externally, the nationality’s diversity of travel freedom has decreased, meaning there are fewer countries South Africans can visit without having to obtain visas. However, there has been a substantial increase in South Africa’s weight of travel freedom, which means countries that South Africans can visit visa-free have a better quality of life, said Smit. South Africa has also seen a gradual decline in the freedom of settlement category, which means South Africans have a harder time securing permission to settle elsewhere in the world. “Settlement Freedom is largely governed by historical relationships between countries, including colonial relationships,” Smit said. “There is very little a country can do to alter history and the imbalances it has created. However, another major factor impacting settlement freedom is reciprocity: if a country makes it easy for nationals of other countries to work and settle in its jurisdiction, then other countries may eventually return the favour.” In recent years, she said, South Africa has introduced a number of restrictive immigration laws, making it very difficult for foreign nationals from around the world to settle and work here, with a vast amount of bureaucracy. This makes the odds of other countries opening their borders to South Africans lower, said Smit. “Improving the country’s foreign policy and diplomatic approach may help South Africa improve its standing in this category in the long term.” Smit said on the settlement freedom score, Cape Verde and The Gambia outperform South Africa significantly: South Africa is ranked 50th, while The Gambia and Cape Verde rank 17th and 20th, respectively. “On the travel ranking, however, South Africa outperforms the other two nationalities: it is ranked 82nd, while Cape Verde is ranked 111th and Gambia is ranked 107th.” TALK TO US What can South Africa do to improve its ranking in the annual Quality of Nationality Index? Tell us in the comments below  