A way forward that is satisfactory. This is what the convenor of the ANC deployees to the North West, Obed Bapela, is expecting from the ANC meeting currently under way in Mahikeng. The meeting, called by President Cyril Ramaphosa, was aimed at restoring calm in the protest-ridden area and was expected to discuss demands by the community that Supra Mahumapelo be removed as Premier. While condemning the violence seen in the three days of intensive protests, in which businesses were looted, properties and vehicles burnt and roads barricaded, Bapela said the community members were right to raise issues of concern. He also hinted that they might be appeased. “The matters they have raised ... we have heard as the ANC. We’re now involved by bringing all the players here in Mahikeng to come and listen once more so the ANC can then make a determination on what is the next step that can save the situation of the North West ... that people can be happy that at least, finally there’s something that the ANC is doing,” he said. Bapela said corruption was the uppermost thing in people’s minds and “even though they’re painting it on one individual, it has gone broader than an individual”. “Therefore, we have to really examine that info, test and, based on the facts, we’ll act on any wrongdoing. On service delivery or non-service delivery raised as an issue, people are right to say we see millions of rands going to companies – there’s been a number of advance payments even before the companies could do anything. Rightfully so, this is your money; it’s taxpayers’ money,” he said. READ: Infographic: The woes of Supra Mahumapelo “We understand the anger because once you see millions going to companies but when you look at services – the potholes, grass not cut, street lights not on at night and roads not in good condition – then you begin to say my money is now being given to companies just to eat. “We have heard and we have listen to that message.” Meanwhile, sporadic scenes of looting, burning tyres and barricaded roads continued through the tense Mahikeng as Mahumapelo’s future as premier is determined. Mahikeng remained on a knife-edge as violent protests entered their third day with residents from areas around Mahikeng joining in. READ: Pressure piling up on Ramaphosa to remove Supra The communities were complaining about service delivery and calling for Mahumapelo’s removal. This, they said, was the only thing that would see the total shutdown of Mahikeng lifted. Bapela said the ANC caucus in the legislature had raised issues of corruption in health and Mahumapelo’s office. These include dubious tenders awarded to Mediosa – a Gupta-linked company – and the more than R200-million contract to Nepo IT by the premier’s office. Offices falling under the premier’s office were raided by the Hawks after controversy was raised regarding the Nepo contract. This was one of the reasons why some ANC members of the provincial legislature were willing to support the Economic Freedom Fighters’ motion of no confidence on Mahumapelo and vote out their own comrade. “The ANC has taken a resolution that no ANC member should be voting with the opposition to remove another party member ... members are now beginning to understand if they voted with the opposition we’d be in more trouble as the ANC. But they want this issue to be resolved as soon as possible,” Bapela said.   