Annelie Lotriet, the only woman challenging for the position of DA federal chair, wants to see the party giving diverse views on contentious issues space, to avoid the headache of factions weighing it down as it heads to its congress. The 57-year-old mother of two is no newcomer to the DA. She first served as a DA councillor in Mangaung, Free State, 18 years ago, and is now provincial chairperson there. Lotriet spends much of her time in Parliament, a role she has held since 2009. She sits on the parliamentary constitutional review committee that is tasked with dealing with the contentious motion to expropriate land without compensation. During the last week of nominations, DA members in various provinces approached her and convinced her she had a good chance of taking over from federal chairperson Athol Trollip. “They said I’m a reasonable person who is calm and can unite people and doesn’t belong to a specific side,” she says. She stops to explain the difficulty she has singing her own praises. “It’s difficult to talk about myself, but they said this is what the party now needs, that I’m very credible, competent and I come across as a person who is very reliable and will keep my head when things are difficult.” The former interpreter for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission feels the party needs to tackle problems, including its position on diversity. “We have a number of issues in the party that we have not sorted out as we grow and that is what I would like focus on, especially to create platforms and spaces for people to share those ideas.” Race continues to haunt the DA and some of its black supporters are pushing for more representation in Parliament. Lotriet believes this cannot be resolved “artificially or mechanistically”. “I think it’s a natural thing of humans that if you have an issue with something and you don’t get space to share your views, or you are put down by someone else about your views, then people tend to go into groups. We need to talk about our concerns, fears and ambitions,” she says.