President Cyril Ramaphosa has praised the late struggle stalwart Winnie Madikizela-Mandela for never betraying the struggle and her people, saying she hated corruption and state capture. Ramaphosa was addressing an impressive crowd of thousands who had packed two giant marquees at the Mphuthumi Mafumbatha Stadium in Mbizana during the official provincial memorial service for the former ANC Women’s League president. Madikizela-Mandela, who will be buried on Saturday in Johannesburg, was born in Mbhongweni village in Mbizana, Eastern Cape. She passed away last week after a long battle with illness. The ex-wife of late former president, Nelson Mandela, Madikizela-Mandela – another South African icon and an ANC MP – has been credited for having kept the fires burning during the liberation struggle and for ensuing that Madiba’s name did not die when he was incarcerated into Robben Island along with other political prisoners. Ramaphosa was flanked by Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi, Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Minister Senzeni Zokwana, Police Minister Bheki Cele, Eastern Cape acting premier Fikile Xasa, various MECs, mayors, dignitaries and members of the Madikizela family. Tuesday’s events started with the president visiting the Madikizela family in Mbhongweni, 33 km from Mbizana, where he paid his respects. The clergy led the masses in prayer in memory of Madikizela-Mandela. Delivering his eulogy for Madikizela-Mandela, Ramaphosa said the struggle icon had been troubled by the phenomenon of state capture and corruption. “If there is anything that Mama Winnie hated, it was corruption and this thing, this demon that has been in our midst now called state corruption and state capture. She hated that thing,” said Ramaphosa. He said her spirit was never broken and that she never sold out the struggle. “She never gave up. She never betrayed the struggle. She never sold out. She emerged from every situation meant to break her even stronger and more powerful, courageous and more determined – that was Winnie Mandela,” said Ramaphosa to cheering crowds. The tiny town of Mbizana was at a standstill as thousands who had been bussed from afar come to pay their last respects to Madikizela-Mandela who was affectionately known in the community as Mangutyana, her clan name. Clad in ANC colours, party loyalists – including members of the ANC Women’s League – sang and praised Madikizela-Mandela. Opposition parties were also in attendance including the Economic Freedom Fighters, the United Democratic Movement, and the Democratic Alliance. Also represented was the ANC’s alliance partners, the SA Communist Party, the SA National Civic Organisation, and Cosatu. Ramaphosa said it was a special occasion to celebrate the life of Madikizela-Mandela even though the country had been shocked at her passing. “Our country was shattered by the devastating news of the passing away of our beloved mother, uMam’uWinnie whom we unmistakably and befittingly call the ‘mother of our nation’. Symbolic of her own special place in our struggle for freedom, justice and equality,” he said. He said Madikizela-Mandela believe that freedom would have to be fought for and achieved. “Her actions were therefore at all times informed by the commitment to enhance the capacity of our movement to fight actively against apartheid and eliminate anything that threatens to weaken that capacity. Learning from her, and in respect of the current context, we have mobilised our democratic forces to do everything possible to enhance our capacity to fight actively against poverty, unemployment and inequality, and eliminate anything that threatens to weaken that capacity,” Ramaphosa said. He said South Africans should be men and women of great courage and determination as Madikizela-Mandela was, in order to serve the interest of the people. “Mam’uWinnie served our people. She did not serve her own family. She did not serve any other interest; all that she knew was to serve the people of South Africa and that is what she was committed to. As we celebrate her life today it must not just be an act of putting her body in that coffin and into the ground, but it should be an act where her spirit, her courage and determination will regenerate itself into our hearts and minds, so that we should continue serving the people of this country,” said Ramaphosa.