Dr Achieng Ojwang, 48 Mama Nomzamo Winnie Madikizela-Mandela represents many things to me as an African woman born outside of South Africa, moving to Johannesburg from Nairobi in my late 20s. My early memories of Mama Winnie through music, newspapers and radio in the 1980s is of a wilful young woman who had presence: a fierce and indomitable presence that was impossible to ignore, manipulate, relegate or diminish. Her vision for a better South Africa was clear: one that respected the dignity and humanity of Black South Africans; completely rid of apartheid and its systemic violence and the concoction of white racist supremacy and patriarchy. For those of us outside of South Africa at the time, the lasting memory etched of the oppressor is that of the steely, white apartheid policemen in the Hippo, with dogs and guns chasing and killing black youth. As she carved and led a movement from the townships mainly of young black South Africans, Mama Winnie was preparing the youth for a consciousness that would be necessary for a black-centred future leadership of a free South Africa. Always the revolutionary, we could feel her palpable pain, rage and determination even from afar, fist clenched and raised as she led from the front. She carried the pain of black South Africa on her shoulders, while symbolising the pain of oppressed black people globally. She exuded agency and urgency, influence and humility. I never met her in person, but like many, I felt her in this way even as I took that first step into her old family home on Vilakazi Street Soweto. Her spirit and legacy will thrive despite the continuous onslaught on her persona in the post-apartheid era and even in her death. In patriarchal and racist systems, black women are expected to be ‘disciplined’ in their invisibility. Mama Winnie defied this. As we send her off, a lot remains unfinished. Structural racism, patriarchy, gender violence and deep levels of poverty persist. Let us borrow a fraction of her bravery and selflessness for change. Let us be inspired by her unwavering love and support for the youth and their future. Let us be defiant and persistent in our demands for equality and justice. Given her immense contributions and what she stood for, we must advance and protect her memory and legacy. We can never thank you enough mama and with aching hearts, we send you off in love and peace! Rest in Power! Dr Achieng Ojwang is executive head of Global Compact Network South Africa. She writes in her personal capacity   Phethagatso Motumi, 24 When the news broke, in the vast memories I have of her, I thought of many things. How our nation had lost a mother. How so many of her 81 years were spent fighting a system that has yet to be fully dismantled. How there was so much of her life that had yet to be uncovered. And I hoped that in death she would not be reduced to someone’s ex-wife, even if it was that someone. She was so much more than that. Growing up in the 1990s, the image she portrayed struck the perfect balance. It was her controlled poise, always looking stylish in the boldest fashion, together with her stance as a formidable leader in the resistance, that always held my attention. The older I got, the more I began to understand the other bits and pieces. Accusations around corruption and fraud, the adultery and the divorce. All the stigma and backlash she faced until she seemed to step back from politics. But could she ever step back from politics? An activist, she was fearless, unrelenting in her fight for our freedom in a way that was quickly villainised as radical by the apartheid regime and some of her peers. My rage at the oppression she faced not only as a black person but as a woman is something I hold onto. Her vision for the exhale that freedom could truly give is something I await. To think of the grave injustice against her humanity she faced and how it was stifled even more by the patriarchy from fellow comrades is heartbreaking. When Nelson Mandela was in prison, she became the face of the struggle. The passionate voice our nation looked to. Through torture, solitary confinement and imprisonment in more than jail, she was in the trenches. She went toe-to-toe with policemen, healed the wounds of bleeding children and fought to clean up a mess long ago created. She was made of the humanity that runs through all black women’s veins; the burden of being strong for everyone else, the unjust resilience to piece everything back together, uncompromising beliefs and a refusal to become anyone’s shadow. As more opinions and more truths circulate, I think of the great disservice people will give her character. How a life long lived will be summarised in #RIP, regurgitating her flaws when she deserves so much more – is so much more. She is light in our nation’s darkest times, a path of resistance in the long walk ahead of us to take South Africa forward. I hope she knows that her life and her name is one we will never forget. Phethagatso Motumi is a copywriter   Criselda Kananda Dudumashe, 48 My first personal experience with Mam Winnie was when I was being attacked for articulating why we can’t just focus on ARV intervention but needed a holistic approach in the management of HIV. I was called a liar, government mouth piece and all sorts of derogatory words. Mama Winnie instructed her team to look for me and invite me to her home in Soweto, Zindzi facilitated my visit. At the time Mam Winnie was going through a fraud trial herself and was not in a good space. I arrived to a feast that included magwinya, snoek and all sorts. That was a priceless moment, she told me to never lose my voice. She insisted I find organisations that are women-led to help strengthen my message. That this journey would be so lonely at times and I must keep my feet on the ground and my fist up in the air. She said something that lit a fire and fuelled my quest to continue being a voice for the voiceless, with a loving motherly tone, she said: “I just wanted you to know that I believe you and I love you very much, keep talking, lives are saved by your message.” Of cause I shed bucket loads of tears in awe of this act of selflessness. Mam Winnie and I developed a special mother/daughter relationship that led to lots of love, treasured memories, endless laughter and tears of both joy and sorrow. A life well lived. “If you are to free yourselves you must break the chains of oppression yourselves. Only then can we express our dignity, only when we have liberated ourselves can we co-operate with other groups. Any acceptance of humiliation, indignity or insult is acceptance of inferiority.” – 1976 Nomzamo Winfred Zanyiwe Madizeka-Mandela. #RestinPowerMamaWinnie Aluta Continua Criselda Kananda Dudumashe is a radio and TV anchor, human rights activist and member of the Board of Trustees for SAWID.   Fébé Potgieter, 51 I first heard about Mam Winnie (and Ma Sisulu) as a high school student in Humansdorp in the Eastern Cape in 1982/83 when we got involved in the UDF Dont Vote, Anti-Tricameral Parliament campaigns. I met her in Soweto and other UDF events as an Azaso activist from UWC. During those early days of activism and up to this day, she was an example of courage, strength and empathy. She was always so happy to see young women in leadership in the youth and student movements, and without fail singled us out for a word of encouragement. She knew how these structures were as patriarchal as society, and the uphill battles that we faced fighting for space and a voice in our own organisations. She frequently took on the male leadership of youth and student organisations about recognising young women. Whenever I met her, I felt like a daughter, but one who was listened to. One of the most important lessons from her is to lead with your heart and your brain, not to forget to empathise with the stories and situations of the individual, whilst fighting for the greater good. And of course, her amazing sense of style. Rest in Power, uMama’. Fébé Potgieter is ANC general manager   Bernedette Muthien, 52 I was a fearless child activist from an activist family on the Cape Flats during the 1980s, a spirited member of COSAS (Congress of South African Students), activism for which I was repeatedly jailed as an adolescent. Then I was more scared of tokoloshe than I was of Casspirs and armed white men with heavy artillery beating beating beating us with combat boots, whips, sticks, fists, on streets and in prisons, ceaseless, senseless violence. Perhaps it was less courage and more relentless passion for overthrowing such blatant and extraordinary apartheid injustices. On our shack and apartheid-hovel home walls we had banned photographs of Nelson Mandela, Winnie Mandela, Palestine mother-and-child, and the iconic picture of the dying Hector Peterson who was born the same year as my elder activist brother. When Winnie made her famous speech, “with our boxes of matches and our necklaces we shall liberate this country”, the apartheid propaganda machine repeatedly broadcast this clip on television and radio, hoping to alienate people from the anti-apartheid movement. Instead, that very speech re-inspired activists, and my particular generation of 1980s youth, the last youth to fight against apartheid, arguably the most fearless of all, building on the generations before us, including those of the 1970s and earlier. That particular memory of Winnie’s matchstick speech still gives me gooseflesh. Yes, necklacing was brutal, horrific, especially on apartheid media-repeat throughout those years. But it was one weapon in a limited arsenal of a Just War waged against a pitiless, oppressive regime, a Just War fought by children like myself with only stones and our fragile under-developed bodies, and indeed for some with the burning tyre necklaces, a Just War against apartheid classified as “a crime against humanity” by the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Thus a complex system of brutal oppression was made crystal clear in one powerful moment. Apartheid was supported overtly by countries such as Israel, and covertly by astonishing networks of governments and corporations for profit in a global Cold War that lasted until at least 1990, the same year the ANC was unbanned. And it was our young bodies and a few stones, and indeed some necklaces and a few other skirmishes, that liberated our country during the 1980s and the dying days of apartheid. Winnie is my sheroe, flawed and human like any other hero. Still, she is the Mother of my Nation, inspiring me to shout, “Womandla”, and to continue marching for the Constitutional rights of the poor, for women and girls, in our developing democracy. Womandla. Bernedette Muthien is lifelong human rights activist, and part-time CRL Rights Commissioner. This piece is written in her personal capacity.   Myesha Jenkins, 69 REVOLUTIONARY WOMAN Don’t admire a revolutionary woman No one will encourage that To want to be A relentless killer woman A militant organising mother woman An earth strong rooted woman An intelligent courageous leader woman A blood witch warrior woman An unassuming worker-bee spy woman No one will encourage that To want to be A Dora Maria Tellez, Nora Astorga, Haydee Santamaria kind of woman An Asata Shakur, Nguyen Thi Binh, Laila Khaled kind of woman A Mila Aguilar, Lolita Lebron, Bernadette Develin kind of woman Thenjiwe Mthintso, Sheila Weinberg, Winnie Miadikizela- Mandela kind of woman No one will encourage that Don’t admire a revolutionary woman Praise her Love her Dream of her Emulate her Sing for her Honour her Don’t admire a revolutionary woman Myesha Jenkins is a poet   Mpho Letlape, 59 It was an afternoon in late 1985 when I received the call at work, at IBM, 124 Main Street, Johannesburg. The voice on the phone said, “This is your mother, Mrs Winnie Mandela speaking. I’d like you and Kgosi (my husband) to come and see me at the Indaba Hotel.” We agreed on a date and time, and went to see her. We were pregnant with our daughter, Thembekile, at the time and lived in DQ at Baragwanath Hospital. When we arrived at Indaba, she said: “Kgosi, I believe you have just started the journey to be the first African Ophthalmologist our country will see, how can I help make this dream come true? What do you need?” We’d just taken a R6000 revolving credit loan with Standard Bank to buy books for Kgosi. We hesitantly shared this with her, she asked where do you buy these books? We told her Westdene Bookshop in Braamfontein. She took the telephone book, looked up the number, called them and immediately opened an account there for Kgosi’s use. This ended a close relationship with photocopying machines. As the years went and Kgo got close to final exams, she figured that if left to the South African authorities, this could get thwarted and facilitated for Kgo to write the exams in Edinburgh, Scotland in 1987/8. Kgo graduated there first. He could register and practice as an ophthalmologist in Mzansi. The South African exams then became a mere academic exercise, he already had the same qualification as his esteemed professor and head of department. He wrote the SA exam in Bloemfontein in 1988, passed first time and became a fellow of the colleges of Ophthalmology in Scotland, England and South Africa. I can go on with how she would appear when a seemingly insurmountable mountain appeared, do the necessary to either remove it or create the means to summit it and disappear without taking credit for any of the many amazing things she did for others. Thank you Mama, for everything. You are a huge part of the women we have become, warts and all. You were always proud of us, always encouraging and supporting our efforts and you leave us with extremely fond memories of the humble, serving, charismatic leader you always will be. I’m smiling as I write this, grateful of the good fortune I have had of having suckled at your wisdom, grace, beauty, and lots more. Mpho Letlape is director and chairman of Standard Bank Tutuwa Community Foundation and deputy chairman: SAWID Trust