An SA National Defence Force (SANDF) corporal – who is already facing an attempted murder charge – was arrested this week after using a luxurious army BMW in an armed robbery. ­­ The white BMW 540i, which cost more than R1 million, is outfitted so passengers can have their backs massaged while listening to the car’s R50 000 sound system. Jacob Marakalla (35) – already on trial for allegedly shooting motorcyclist Carine van Staden in the chest during a road rage incident while driving another official vehicle – was arrested on Tuesday. He was driving the BMW with defence force plates while allegedly on his way to commit a cash-in-transit robbery in Limpopo. He and his accomplices had already allegedly robbed another business when police nabbed them. Marakalla is the official driver and VIP bodyguard of military joint operations head Lieutenant General Barney Hlatshwayo, who is currently in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Police said Marakalla and two accomplices driving stolen cars became involved in a high-speed chase with police. Of all the vehicles, only the R1.2 million military vehicle came through the chase undamaged. The BMW was part of a fleet of superluxury cars the defence force bought for R73 million. Defence force spokesperson Brigadier Mafi Mgobozi said the spending was justified because there was money left over in the defence budget last year. On Tuesday, the BMW was filled with balaclavas, gloves, blue lights, fake number plates and cash. Marakalla’s personal belongings, including his access card to the entrance of the army’s special forces offices, the defence force headquarters and the joint operations headquarters in Pretoria, were also found inside. Police said two pistols were found on Marakalla and his accomplices, but the serial numbers of both had been filed off. Marakalla is now in custody after a brief appearance in the Dzanani Magistrates’ Court on Wednesday. He and his co-accused are charged with aggravated robbery, and the illegal possession of firearms, ammunition and stolen goods. Last month, a charge of abusing a state vehicle was opened against him for using one to take his wife and child fishing. Defence force spokesperson Siphiwe Dlamini condemned the alleged crimes and said they would take steps to discharge Marakalla. – Rapport