In a jubilant moment, three exceptional women held on to each other as they stood on the threshold of a dawning era at the Nelson Mandela University (NMU) in Port Elizabeth this week. Hundreds of people dressed in a kaleidoscope of colours and academic regalia gathered at the institution’s sports centre to mark the inauguration of Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi and Sibongile Muthwa as chancellor and vice-chancellor, respectively. Nobody could have ever imagined that the historically conservative university could be handed over to the women’s hands to carry its vision forward. In her inaugural speech, Fraser-Moleketi hailed her parents alongside her political leaders in the ANC, saying the picture could only be completed by such a moment, one that brought her back to the humble origins of her family in her province of origin – the Eastern Cape. “As the titular head, I look forward to working with the vice-chancellor, Professor Sibongile Muthwa, a woman of the highest academic calibre and integrity, and chairperson of [the NMU council], ambassador Nozipho January-Bardill – another role model. This is the only university to have a trio of women – strong women, unapologetically so – at the helm,” she said. Muthwa echoed the sentiments and acknowledged the role her grandfather played in shaping her life. “My grandfather was not formally educated. He taught himself to read and write. He did not believe jobs were for either men or women. He believed and told me many times that I could be anything and I could do anything. “He instilled in me the importance of a quiet moment, that is, of waking up early to think and do things while the world is still. He taught me, by his own example, that it is fine to be different and to value the importance of independent thought,” she reminisced, adding that he also taught her the importance of solitary contemplation as a disciplined practice that builds spiritual and mental resilience. The overarching challenge Muthwa and her fellow leaders have to tackle is the battle to claim the free education and transformation of South African universities – as enshrined in the multitude of ANC manifestos since the dawn of democracy 25 years ago. Muthwa said the glaring gaps, which were exposed trenchantly by #RhodesMustFall and #FeesMustFall, are the stalled transformation of the South African society. She succeeds Derrick Swartz, whose 10-year tenure ended last year, and who hailed her appointment as an epoch-making moment in the history of the university. January-Bardill said both women were similar to the late Nelson Mandela. “They recognise the value of working together towards a better future for all, for it is only through social cohesion that we can overcome challenges and seek solutions that transform, redress and make our world a better place. “It is therefore fitting that their inauguration takes place during the 100-year anniversary of the birth of Nelson Mandela,” she said. The historic moment was witnessed by former first lady Zanele Mbeki and Nelson Mandela’s grandson, chief Mandla Mandela, among other high-profile individuals. 