By Friday morning the South African Police Services confirmed that 23 people had been arrested in the North West since violence erupted in the area on Wednesday. Mahikeng, the capital of the province, has seen widespread violence, which started in Montshiwa township where a bus was torched and businesses looted on Wednesday morning. The violence then spread to the Mahikeng central business district, nearby Danville suburb and the Setlopo village. Seven suspects who were arrested on Thursday afternoon in Danville and Lomanyaneng were expected to appear in the Mmabatho Magistrates’ Court this morning. They were arrested for public violence. Nine other suspects arrested on Wednesday were released on a warning but were due back in court on Tuesday May 29. READ: Mahikeng on tenterhooks as anti-Supra protests turn violent The residents of the North West took to the streets to demand the resignation of Premier Supra Mahumapelo and better service delivery from the government. The provincial law enforcement unit would be deployed to beef up security in the area. The unit would ensure that normal services – including the clearing of major roads so that the public could utilise them – continued. President Cyril Ramaphosa cut short his Commonwealth heads of state visit in London to return home to quell the unrest. He was expected in the North West today to meet with provincial leaders at 12pm. READ: Ramaphosa back in SA to deal with North West chaos Provincial commissioner Lieutenant-General Baile Motswenyane said that “it has also been noted with concern that properties, which will still be needed in future, have been deliberately damaged”. Motswenyane also mentioned in a statement that learners from Onkgopotse Tiro Comprehensive School “had to stay without eating the whole day as the truck that was carrying their meals was delayed, until it was escorted by the police”. Motswenyane reiterated that the police would not hesitate to take the necessary action to bring normality to Mahikeng and the surrounding villages. Meanwhile, it has been reported that a man was killed by police while on his way to the protests. However, a statement released by the family said that the incident turned fatal after an argument broke out and “that the lame argument between the two had nothing to do with mass demonstration or whatever that was happening in that road. Rather it was [believed] to be personal.” Police spokesperson Sabata Mokgwabone said that he had no knowledge of the incident but confirmed that the police were following up on another case of murder in the area not related to the protests.