Somizi Mhlongo says should anyone make unpleasant homophobic jokes about him at the upcoming Comedy Central Roast of Somizi, he’ll call them out. The Idols judge doesn’t think anything from his roast would upset him because “it’s all in the name of entertainment”. But the 45-year-old won’t tolerate any jibe that crosses the fine line between humour and homophobia. “Should it happen I won’t let it slide because the Comedy Central Roast is quite a powerful platform,” he says, adding that he will address the issue by sending a strong message that the line has been crossed, just like it can be with “black jokes”. The roast format brings a panel of the country’s funniest comedians and opinionated personalities to “roast” one another before taking aim at Mhlongo on Thursday when it will be recorded at Gold Reef City Lyric theatre. Panellists include poet and singer Ntsiki Mazwai, DJ Fresh, actress Nomzamo Mbatha and surprise addition ANC elections’ head Fikile Mbalula. Gareth Cliff will be the Roast Master. Mhlongo is already roasting Mazwai. “Ntsiki Mazwai! There is free soap at the gym,” he says. Besides his panellists, Mhlongo would really like to roast Julius Malema because “his comebacks would be interesting”. Mbatha better watch out because he knows a lot about her. “People must not take it for granted that she is innocent and cute. She is a bitch and a half,” he says. Mhlongo credits his loving parents with making him the fearless social creature he is today. “I am not scared of people. I am not intimidated by anyone or anything.” His showbusiness parents took him from show to show and he “never missed out on my parents’ love”. “Every time I think of my father, I remember him holding me and my mother telling me how smart I was. My parents never criticised me,” he says. If he had to roast himself, he would target his two weaknesses: “My insecurities and that I used to wet my bed until I was in high school, which is something a few people know.” He offers an example of his insecurities: “My fiancé sent me a text yesterday saying, ‘I am leaving the office I’m going home.’ My question was why he is leaving the office at 6pm when he knocks off at 5.30pm?” Mhlongo says as confident as he is, he wishes he was more secure and realistic. Besides Idols, Vuzu, his reality show Living The Dream with Somizi, and co-hosting the breakfast show on Metro FM, Mhlongo has more work piling up. “I am working on a recipe book and dance exercise DVD volume 2. Both will be released in September,” he says, adding that he underestimated the hard work involved in writing a cookbook, which he thought would be a one-month affair. “The future is so exciting and it looks so beautiful beyond this year,” he says, adding that his last booking is in 2022. “I am fortunate at my age to be afforded such opportunities,” he says. . Catch The Roast on Comedy Central (DStv channel 122) on Monday, May 7, at 9pm