South African star athlete Caster Semenya may be prevented from competing after the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) announced new rules for female athletes with high natural testosterone levels. The IAAF said that from November 1, it will limit entry for all international events from 400 meters to the mile to women with testosterone levels below a specified level. This will include hurdles races, 800m, 1500m, one-mile races and combined events over the same distances. Women with elevated testosterone will be expected to reduce their hormone level for “six months (for example by use of hormonal contraceptives)” before being eligible to run, and they will have to maintain that lowered level. Semenya, a two-time Olympic 800-meter champion who competes in the 800m and 1500m races, was previously cleared to compete in all events. She responded on Twitter: “I am 97% sure you don’t like me but I’m 100% sure I don’t care.” Make no mistake, this is the most sexist paradox in sports: a man with naturally high testosterone is gifted, but a woman with naturally high testosterone is a cheat. #CasterSemenya #IAAF https://t.co/UZnfCPCWLL Doping/using drugs/artificial hormones to alter the natural way an athlete's body functions, is illegal according to IAAF rules. But it's ok for Caster & transgendered athletes to take drugs that will superficially alter the way their bodies naturally function? Balance me here?? The new regulations lay down a series of criteria for athletes with a Difference of Sexual Development (DSD) to be eligible to compete internationally. Under the rules an athlete must: • be recognised at law either as female or as intersex (or equivalent); • must reduce her blood testosterone level to below five nmol/L for a continuous period of at least six months; • thereafter she must maintain her blood testosterone level below five nmol/L continuously. Prior to the IAAF’s announcement, other athletes believed that Semenya had an unfair advantage because of the high levels of her naturally occurring testosterone. Athletics authorities said they struggled to find a solution that both respected Semenya’s rights while also providing what they say is a “level playing field”. Under the new rules, Semenya will either have to take prescribed medication to allow her to compete, or she must move to longer-distance running. “We want athletes to be incentivised to make the huge commitment and sacrifice required to excel in the sport, and to inspire new generations to join the sport and aspire to the same excellence,” said IAAF President Sebastian Coe. But South Africans rallied behind Semenya and blasted the athletics body. The Economic Freedom Fighters said it was “a deliberate, sexist, racist and anti-African attack on our black female champion”. The party called on the world to rally in support of Semenya and “reject the IAAF for the racist and misogynist organisation it is”. The sports Minister was similarly furious and said the regulations “are designed to disadvantage Caster in her career”. Meanwhile the ANC said the “racial undertones of this cannot go unnoticed” and the party called on the Court of Arbitration for Sport to set aside the regulations, eNCA reported. - Additional reporting by Reuters and News24