Social media erupted in outrage and disbelief on Wednesday night after the screening of a tell-all documentary about the life of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. The documentary, simply titled Winnie, aired on eNCA hours after the official state memorial for Madikizela-Mandela was held at Orlando Stadium in Soweto and it exposed how the mother of the nation was “betrayed” by the ANC, especially by her husband, former president, Nelson Mandela. Archbishop Desmond Tutu was also called out for “letting the mother of the nation down” when he had requested her to apologise at the Truth and Reconciliation Commission hearings in 1997. In the documentary, Madikizela-Mandela suggests that the subpoena for her to testify at the TRC was linked to her nomination for the position of deputy president of the ANC. “It was an unhealthy coincidence in my mind that this must happen a few days before the national conference. I was the only one in the ANC who was taken to the TRC by her own government. I was seething with rage. He [Tutu] was acting there for the public, acting for Stratcom” she says. “To this day, I ask God to forgive me, for not forgiving Tutu. I wasn’t going to say sorry as if I had been responsible for apartheid,” she adds. The truth about the Stompie Seipei murder and the extent of the apartheid regime’s smear campaign to discredit and isolate Madikizela-Mandela is also revealed. Since her passing, the nation has seen fiery debate around Madikizela-Mandela’s character, with the “saint or sinner” dichotomy dominating the narrative. The documentary, which premiered at the prestigious Sundance Film Festival last year, seems to have cleared up the smokescreen with all its revelations, the biggest one being the confession that the apartheid government worked actively to drag Madikizela-Mandela’s name through the mud. Stratcom head Vic McPherson admits that he had 40 journalists planted to write defamatory articles on Madikizela-Mandela. “I already had 40 journalists working directly or indirectly for me. So through them I could have specific reports placed in the newspapers, and it would be front page,” McPherson says. This would lead to internal divisions in the ANC and allies such as the IFP distancing themselves from Madikizela-Mandela, isolating her even more from the masses. All those 40 journalists who worked with Stratcom against Mama Nomzamo should voluntarily come out and ask for forgiveness. Embedded journalism is a serious threat to our democracy. #Winnie single handedly making an entire regime fear you!!! When they had to arrest her, the police came in swarms!! Just for ONE WOMAN, if that isn't power I don't know what is. She was stronger than I ever ever imagined she was. I'm sad to celebrate her life too late pic.twitter.com/9K0G2Nu7Il It is also shown that the man who killed Stompie, Jerry Richardson, was a police informer working in Madikizela-Mandela’s inner circle. Many also asked why former president Nelson Mandela was willing to forgive the apartheid government, but not his wife. Mandela forgave the apartheid government which tortured people,raped them,killed thousands of his people ,jailed him for 27 YearsBut could not forgive #Winnie for something she didn't even do? Wow Nelson Mandela was MADE by Mama Winnie!!! #Winnie I have always wondered why Nelson Mandela, of all the Revonia trialists, became so prominent and a centre of attraction and today this #Winnie documentary is answering that question. Winifred Nomzamo Zanyiwe Mandela gave Nelson his fame. That is a fact, like it or not ???????? I’m committing to make sure my daughter watch the #Winnie documentary multiple times over the course of the year. She will learn. She will know. If you missed the documentary last night, here’s when you can catch repeats: eNCA: Friday at 9pm, Saturday at 4pm and Sunday at 8pm e.tv: Sunday at 4pm Openview e-extra: Sunday at 9pm [REPEAT TIMES] #Winnie - The documentary will repeated on #eNCA at the following times. Times for eTV and OpenView HD to be announced. pic.twitter.com/iybo12vb1u 