Never give an emotional response to nonsense. That was one of the greatest lessons that Bra Willie’s wife, Baby Dorcas Kgositsile, learnt from the SA national poet laureate. Speaking through a letter read by Gail Mabalane, Professor Keorapetse William Kgositsile’s wife was appreciative of “everyone who came out in numbers to help us in this dark moment. “You were my best friend, lover and master. If I could sing, I would weave a song about your worldwide heart. Every time I miss you, it will be in my heart that I will find you,” she wrote. Kgositsile’s official funeral service took place at Marks Park Sports Club in Johannesburg, where hundreds of people gathered for the send-off of the literary giant, political activist and admired academic. Bra Willie, as he was fondly known, died on January 3, after a short illness. He is survived by his wife, three sisters, several children and grandchildren.  “You really loved your friends. Your love for your children was immense; you were a great father,” Docras said in her letter. Messages of condolences poured in for Kgositsile from the Thabo Mbeki Foundation, the Gauteng provincial government, the Presidency, playwright John Kani, musician Jonas Gwangwa, poet Lebo Mashile and African author Ngugi wa Thiong’o, who said: “I believe his spirit is watching and urging us to celebrate life. His spirit of love and laughter rests among us.” Politician Pallo Jordan described his friend as a giant: “He was not only a literary giant; he was also a political one.” He added that their love for art and politics was the basis on which they forged their friendship. Barbara Masekela, a good friend of the poet, said he was a dedicated artist, teacher, and a freedom fighter. She added that he was well-informed, principled and he always knew the politics of the day. Willie had the gift of a questioning mind, she said. “He was a father to all of his children including his literary offspring in South Africa.” Jazz musician Jonas Gwangwa, said he met Willie in 1957 and they shared a desk at Madibane High School. At one point he also shared a flat with jazz trumpeter Hugh Masekela in New York and there were South African students who would visit them and Willie was among them. Gwangwa said he met Willie one again in Botswana where they were part of an arts and culture festival. “We were very close friends and he loved music very much.” Professor Mandla Makhanya, vice-chancellor of the University of South Africa, said he was conflicted to be mourning the loss and celebrating the life of Bra Willie. “Although Bra Willie was a man of small physical stature, he was a giant. He came from humble beginnings at Matibane High School. He was an outstanding scholar and poet.’’ Makhanya said Bra Willie “lived a life of commitment for the advancement of human beings” adding that the Kgositsile family had donated a body of literary work produced by Bra Willie to the Unisa library. Cyril Ramaphosa, deputy president of South Africa and president of the ANC, said Willie used his pen to fight against the injustices of society during the apartheid era. “He found a platform in the New Age newspaper to write about the pain of the apartheid regime and he remained committed and brave.” He was one of the trusted cadres of the ANC and worked closely with struggle stalwart Oliver Tambo, said Ramaphosa. “Bra Willie was one the best chroniclers of our time. He was able to express things in a beautiful and incisive way. He displayed great insight in his poetry. “Through his words we can see that he had perception and imagination,” said Ramaphosa adding that he possessed a broad world view. He lit a flame that burnt bright in our darkest hour illuminating and informing the world about the plight of the South African struggle. He was renowned internationally, said Ramaphosa. “He was a fervent believer of youth development. He believed that empowering the youth was empowering the nation. “We may not see his signature smile again but the voice of a poet like Bra Willie cannot be silenced.” He will be laid to rest at the Westpark Cemetery in Johannesburg.