At least one person was reportedly injured after shots were fired when a group of people, with some clad in ANC T-shirts, clashed with those supporting an initiative aimed at exposing corruption in the North West government. Those who organised the event to launch the Save North West Campaign earlier today said those who disrupted their gathering before it even started were a “rented crowd”. City Press saw several minibus taxis and a bus dropping off people, some wielding sticks and at least one man seen wielding an axe and a screwdriver at Ratshidi Hall in Montshiwa Stadt, Mahikeng, ahead of the event. Different groups joined in the song and dance on arrival and later, they marched on to the property where people were chased away and others seen running for their lives after being attacked by the mob. The group also went into the hall were chairs were damaged. Later on, some men were seen carrying big speakers as they walked away from the hall. Event organisers later confirmed that those who supplied the sound system had also run for their lives and that all their equipment was stolen. Save North West Campaign released a statement earlier this week explaining that they were an organisation “which is aimed at cleaning up the North West province from the cloud of corruption and maladministration”. “This will be done by reporting a series of corrupt activities at the local police station and provide evidence backing the cases with concrete evidence to the police. "The process of reporting these corrupt cases will be done every month starting from this coming Monday on 29th January 2018,” they said in a statement. One of those behind the idea is Themba Gwabeni, an ANC member, known to be one of those who have been outspoken against the leadership of Premier Supra Mahumapelo. Gwabeni confirmed their event was disrupted and property damaged. “We’re told at least one person was injured, but we’re not sure who shot who. They broke all chairs making sure that even if we come later, there will be nothing to sit on,” he said. “It is not the first time that our meetings have been disrupted by innocent people, some of them unemployed and if you were to ask them why they were there and doing what they were doing, they would not know. It is very sad how a brother can be set against another brother.” Gwabeni said what happened earlier today was a “disgrace and setback for freedom”, adding that one way or the other they will push forward with their initiative. Meanwhile, the ANC in the province has accused Gwabeni and others of trying to destabilise the province while pushing for the removal of Mahumapelo. “The ANC in the province is aware of a group that masquerades as anti-corruption activists and wants to cause unease in the province with claims that they’re fighting corruption by our Provincial Chairperson, Comrade Supra Mahumapelo. "This group – led by some within our party – has been going around lobbying people to join and support their actions,” the party said in a statement yesterday. “We are fully aware that this group’s main intention is to destabilise the province and hope that by so doing, they will force the removal of Comrade Supra as Premier of the province. "We condemn their actions and the use of ANC colours in the agenda that’s clearly self-serving and has got nothing to do with the party.” In another statement, the ANC in Ngaka Modiri Molema region reiterated the same sentiment, saying “those behind this campaign are well known to be power-hungry and pushing a grudge against Comrade Supra for years now. "When they failed to use the North West Business Forum they moved on to create another vehicle, despite failing all this time to back their claims with evidence.”