A disgraced beneficiary funds administrator spent millions of rands meant for dead miners’ children on meals from Nando’s, DStv bills, hiring suites at stadiums, office parties and buying shares in other companies. Documents and reports obtained by City Press show that mismanagement by Bongani Mhlanga, the former boss of Mvunonala Holdings, has led to the squandering of over R500 million belonging to the Amplats Group Provident Fund. The money was seemingly misappropriated from the Bophelo Beneficiary Fund (BBF), which was administered by Bophelo Benefit Services (BBS), a subsidiary of Mvunonala Holdings, which Mhlanga founded. He was deported to his home country, Zimbabwe, from South Africa last year and owned a string of financial services companies, including asset managers and insurance entities. A tranche of documents was obtained by City Press, including two reports by KPMG and WMK Matlala Attorneys, briefing documents, memorandums, bank statements and proofs of payments. They show that Mhlanga transferred hundreds of millions of rands from his other entities into Mvunonala Holdings’ account, which he then used for other purposes. The documents show Mhlanga and his companies: He then used R30 million of that to help a company called Intsika Women Empowered Solutions acquire 51% shares in a company called Salt Employee Benefits. At the time, the two directors of Intsika were Mvunonala Holdings employees. Another R8 million was paid to Salt in December 2016, and another R64 million of the R104 million was channelled into an account with the reference “CSC-Johannes”; Six sources at Mvunonala and Satawu told City Press that Mhlanga is a personal friend of Satawu’s former general secretary Zenzo Mahlangu, who was also deported to Zimbabwe last year. The Satawu National Provident Fund has also invested money in the BBF; and HOW MVUNONALA UNRAVELLED City Press reported in April last year that BBF was struggling to pay some of its more than 7 000 beneficiaries the money due to them from their late relatives’ pensions. The Financial Services Board subsequently placed both the BBS and the BBF under curatorship. In September, curator Juanito Damon called for a forensic probe to investigate investment funds paid to external individuals and institutions; cash payments to external parties and entities; payments made for refurbishing company property; properties invested in with funds from either BBS or BBF without value generated for either entity; share purchases in external entities with money from BBF and BBS without any value to either entity; and property and vehicles purchased for directors, management and external parties. Damon announced that investment company Vele Investments had bought the entire Mvunonala group for R300 million. GROSS MISMANAGEMENT OF FUNDS The extent of mismanagement at Mvunonala, and the BBF in particular, is laid bare in reports by WMK Matlala Attorneys and KPMG. Both were commissioned by Amplats to look into the BBF following reports the fund was struggling to pay beneficiaries. In its report, WMK said: “Most concerning was that in 2014, the BBF trustees terminated the services of eight asset managers to appoint Mvunonala Asset Managers, which is a sister company of BBF. “The fact that trustees of the BBF terminated eight asset managers simultaneously and replaced them with an asset manager related to Bophelo, to the detriment of beneficiaries, is a contravention of the law.” It concluded that the BBF’s decision to invest more than R255 million in property was a contravention of the Pension Funds Act, which bars firms from investing more than 25% of their total assets in fixed assets. KPMG raised concerns about the independence of trustees Tshepo Mathopo and Kenneth Mourant. The two were also non-executive directors of Nzalo Insurance Services, a subsidiary of Mvunonala Holdings. Mathopo is also Mhlanga’s attorney. The firm asked questions about Kevin Naidoo who was chairman of the BBF board of trustees and a shareholder in and a director of Mvunonala Holdings. WHAT THEY SAY Naidoo told City Press: “There were always other independent trustees and, as such, there was no way we could have a free rein. “Everything was done properly, according to corporate governance principles.” The KPMG report exposes poor financial management. It says it was unacceptable for BBF to end two financial years with unallocated funds when it did not have much money to handle. Auditors asked hard questions about expenses. “The value of investments and cash increased from R296 million in 2013 to R373 million in 2014, resulting in a growth in expenses of over 85%. "Management fees paid are not commensurate with the increase in the fund size. "It appears the fund was mainly controlled by individuals affiliated to the Mvunonala Group, and not sponsor funds,” the report states. “The move from a broad spread of independent investment managers to related parties of the benefits administrator has not been explained in terms of how any potential conflict of interest was managed and it appears the fund is in a significantly worse financial position in terms of its ability to meet obligations.” Mathopo, who has previously spoken on behalf of Mvunonala and Mhlanga, said he did not “have a mandate” to respond to questions. Regarding his alleged conflict of interest he said: “I did disclose my position as the nonexecutive director of Nzalo and the fact that I was also the personal attorney of Mr Mhlanga when I took up appointment to the BBF board.” Damon told City Press last week they were trying to recover what they could from individuals and entities which benefited. “We have appointed a company to conduct a forensic investigation to determine who got what.” He would not comment further. Vele’s chief operations officer, Angel Nyathela, said: “I can’t comment about what happened before we arrived. "What I can tell you is that when we arrived, the place was messy and beneficiaries were not being paid. "We have plugged all the holes; beneficiaries are now being paid. We have automated a lot of manual systems and we are running a professional outfit.” Eddie Strydom, managing director of Salt Employee Benefits, said that following Mvunonala’s negative publicity last year, he decided to end the relationship with Intsika Women Empowered Solutions. “I have bought back all the shares which I sold to them.” A senior official at Vele, who did not want to be named, said the company was preparing to drag both Mhlanga and Salt to court. “This is because when Eddie bought back Salt’s shares, he did not give the money to Vele. He gave it to Bongani and the directors of Intsika. “He should have brought the money back to Vele, considering that it was Mvunonala’s money that bought shares in Salt,” he said. Mhlanga did not respond to requests for comment.