Deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa touched down in Davos, Switzerland, on Monday with a delegation to the World Economic Forum. The forum, which ends on January 26, is a platform for countries and corporations to enhance economic growth and strengthen ties among world nations. This year’s theme is “creating a shared future in a fractured world”. Ramaphosa is being accompanied by Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba, Minister in the Presidency for Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation, Jeff Radebe; Economic Development Minster Ebrahim Patel; Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies; Minister of Public Works Nkosinathi Nhleko; and Minister of International Relations and Cooperation Maite Nkoana-Mashabane. Part of the reason for the delegation’s attendance at the forum is to restore confidence in the South African economy, the presidency said yesterday. “The South African government will continue to act decisively to address challenges at its key state owned enterprises to restore public and investor confidence and to ensure that they fulfil their economic and developmental mandates,” the Presidency said. The forum provides the country with “a platform to showcase its attractiveness as an investment destination and trade partner; set out plans that are unfolding to secure improved and inclusive economic growth, and contribute to efforts to respond to societal challenges globally”. Ramaphosa is expected to meet high-level politicians and business leaders from across the globe. Also in attendance is Zimbabwe’s new leader, Emmerson Mnangagwa, who is already implementing plans to increase economic growth in the country. Yesterday he took to his Facebook page to tell his followers the very simple message: “The new Zimbabwe is open for business, looking to the future, and ready to take its place in the family of nations once again.” This is the first time that a Zimbabwean president will be attending the forum. Just last month Mnangagwa called on investors and businesses from South Africa to meet the Zimbabwean embassy, at a business conference where he appealed with investors to look at Zimbabwe as an investment opportunity. In his inaugural speech, Mnangagwa said that his government had made the growing of the economy a top priority.    