One of sex-scandal-shamed pastor Timothy Omotoso’s “recruiters” failed to appear before the Port Elizabeth Magistrates’ Court on Monday. Lusanda Solani was almost eight months pregnant when she was arrested with Zukiswa Sitho. Solani had her baby a few weeks ago. This was cited as the reason she didn’t appear before court. It would have been her first appearance in court since being granted bail. Sitho delivered her baby a few days before the arrest. Their bail conditions stipulated that they should report to their local police stations once a week, on Tuesdays, and should attend court on all set dates. Their new attorney, Peter Daubermann, who is the fourth legal representation for Omotoso and second for Sitho and Solani, said he had spoken to Solani, to enquire when she planned to travel down from Durban for the court appearance. He also submitted a medical certificate, which stated that Solani was not fit to travel and thus could not make the appearance before court. Magistrate Thandeka Mashiyi said Solani had shown disrespect for the court. She issued a warrant of arrest and Daubermann was given strict instructions to ensure that she appeared in court on February 13. Daubermann said that he had made new submissions to the directorate of public prosecutions regarding the charges against the three accused. City Press has reliably learnt that the submissions entailed dropping the charges against the three accused. Daubermann stated in the application that the charges levelled against Omotoso and his two co-accused were based on sensation and conspiracies. It also stated that Omotoso was innocent and that the charges against him were ludicrous creations by disgruntled members of his church. National Prosecutions Authority regional spokesperson Tshepo Ndwalaza confirmed that submissions had been made by Daubermann. “There are two matters that are critical about the postponement today,” said Ndwalaza. “The centralisation of the cases as previously indicated in the last appearance is still outstanding and not finalised,” he said. Ndwalaza said it was the jurisdiction of the national directorate of public prosecutions to approve the application for the centralisation of the cases. “The second matter is the absence of Solani in court, for this appearance. The criminal procedure act states that if anyone fails to appear in court, on their scheduled appearance date, the next step is for the court to issue a warrant of arrest,” said Ndwalaza. “The warrant has been issued and Solani has been order to appear before court on February 12. Failure to do so will result in her immediate arrest,” Sitho, Solani and several other women have been identified as recruiters for Omotoso. The allegedly helped Omotoso find his “victims”, luring them to his church in Durban and also “grooming” them for his sexual pleasures. During Omotoso’s bail application, graphic details of how the young girls were recruited to join the ministry, were revealed. Hawks chief investigations officer, Peter Plaatjies, said the recruiters found vulnerable girls from poor homes and enticed them to a life of great possibilities, moved them to Omotoso’s house in Durban. He said the girls were paraded, and those who fitted the desired profile were bought tickets to travel to Durban, where Omotoso was based, to meet him. “They are enticed with money because they are poor and need money.” Plaatjies said the girls would then undergo a transformation process, which involved a complete makeover that turned them into absolute beauties. He said the girls were given large amounts of money. These transactions were either in cash or through money transfer services from shops such as Shoprite. “The girls are kept in the same house and the same room(s) in his house, and in his mission houses in Durban. One by one they are called into a dark room, where Omotoso makes sexual advances on them.” Affidavits presented as evidence before court during the bail application characterised Omotoso as being the kingpin of a sex ring involving mostly unsuspecting girls, some as young as 13. The matter has been remanded to March 8 for the outcome of the centralisation application and transferring of the case to the Port Elizabeth High Court.