The chairperson of Parliament’s select committee on social services has cautioned against pointing fingers and turning the ongoing water crisis in the Western Cape into a political point scoring match. In a statement released by Parliament on behalf of committee chairperson, Cathy Dlamini, the committee urged for all spheres of government to put politics aside and work together “to provide the requisite leadership and guidance”. “The people of the Western Cape deserve leadership and guidance during this time and all spheres of government must meet their specific responsibilities to ensure the continued availability of water. “We continue to call for full cooperation between the national departments of cooperative governance and traditional affairs, and water and sanitation; the Western Cape department of local government, environmental affairs and development planning together with the City of Cape Town in finding solutions to this crisis,” said Dlamini. Last week, DA shadow minister of water and sanitation Leon Basson said that Water and Sanitation Minister Nomvula Mokonyane needed to step up and “show decisive leadership” with the day when taps run dry – dubbed “Day Zero” – fast approaching. “It was under Mokonyane’s watch that the department failed to maintain and upgrade aging water infrastructure, resulting in the inability of national government to supply municipalities with bulk water supply, as is their exclusive mandate. “She must now work hand in hand with local and municipal authorities to find solutions to the challenges facing drought-stricken communities and commit to defeating Day Zero,” Basson said. Mokonyane fired back at the DA, saying that the party was trying to absolve itself of responsibility by placing the blame on national government. Addressing members of the Cape Town Press Club at an event in Newlands on Sunday, Mokonyane said that a collaborative decision would be taken if decisions regarding funding for water projects needed to be considered. She said that simply pumping money into projects in a bid to delay Day Zero was not the way to go to address the water crisis. She assured residents that both spheres of government were working tirelessly to avoid Day Zero.