The Department of Basic Education is battling with late applications while trying to place thousands of learners still without a school. The bulk of the learners not yet enrolled are in Gauteng and Western Cape. “Migration of families to metros that are seen as more economically viable creates a situation where there are more learners than spaces available in schools,” said the department in a statement. The provincial education departments agreed that family migration significantly added to the number of learners. Western Cape department of education spokesperson Jessica Shelver said: “More than 130 000 [people] have moved to the Western Cape over the past five years. This has placed enormous pressure on the education system in the province.” “We encourage people to stay where they are,” said department spokesperson Elijah Mhlanga, and if not, he advised parents to agree with the department’s school recommendations. He said some parents were difficult and insisted on certain schools. Late applications added to the burden, he said. “From April we ask parents to apply but it doesn’t happen,” said Mhlanga. According to the department, “almost all provinces are confronted by similar challenges with Gauteng and the Western Cape being the most affected”. “The Western Cape is investing heavily in school infrastructure and other resources to accommodate this growth, despite our limited budget,” said Shelver. Mhlanga added: “We’re also finding a disturbing trend where people who are in Gauteng don’t apply on time.” He said these parents were selective about which schools they wanted their children to attend, leading to learners staying at home for that year. “The solution really is for every school to perform so that every parent wants to take their child there,” he said. The Gauteng department of education revealed that 3366 students still need to be placed in the province. Last Friday, the basic education department provided the following figures of unplaced learners: Free State – 410 Limpopo – 385 Northern Cape – 706 Mpumalanga – 676 The other provinces, including Western Cape, said they would have the updated numbers on Wednesday. “The Western Cape education department compiles a snap survey on the 10th day of school. This assists with identifying places available at schools as many learners accept places at more than one school. This is standard practice every year and is done to obtain a headcount we can work with for the start of the year,” said Shelver. “We use the figures to identify fluctuations in learner enrolment and unexpected growth, for example, where schools may need more teachers and other resources,” she added. Despite the challenges Mhlanga maintained that every learner would be placed. “All learners will be placed in a school somewhere. What we haven’t worked out is which school it will be,” he said.