The Castle Lite Unlocks Music Experience is back and this year the brand is bringing American hip-hop artist Chance the Rapper to its stage. The announcement was made this evening at the swanky Shine Studios in Braamfontein. Chance will perform at the Castle Lite Unlocks Concerts on 30 April at the Ticketpro Dome in Johannesburg. The announcement was locked inside a large block of ice that attendees of the event had to try to break to reveal details about the event. Other performers that will be performing at the concert is Shane Eagle, Nadia Nakia and Frank Casino. Tickets go on sale at Computicket 12pm tomorrow. Facts about Chance the Rapper: • Chance the Rapper is an independent hip-hop artist from Chicago who released his third mix tape, Coloring Book, in 2016 to critical acclaim. The album features a blend of gospel and hip-hop and was streamed 57.3 million times on Apple Music in its first week. • At the 2017 Grammys ceremony, Chance took home three awards for best new artist, best rap album and best rap performance. • Chance is a shortened version of his first name, Chancelor. • The rapper refuses to sign with a record label, earning most of his money from touring, streaming, and other business ventures. • He’s the first artist to debut on the Billboard charts from streaming only – an achievement believed to be part of the reason the Grammys updated their rules to allow streaming artists to be nominated at the ceremony. • Chance is an activist for peace. In 2014, he held an anti-gun-violence campaign in his hometown of Chicago, helping to cease gun violence for 48 hours straight. • In 2016, Chance met with President Barack Obama at the White House to discuss criminal injustice affecting young black men in the US. • Chance is a part of a neo-soul jazz band called The Social Experiment that released their first album, Surf, in 2015. • He credits Kanye West, Prince, James Brown, Eminem, and gospel artist Kirk Franklin as his creative influences. • In 2014 he launched The Magnificent Coloring Day, an annual music festival event he hopes will create new job opportunities, bring in revenue, and uplift the city of Chicago. 