The gloves are off in the battle over the ANC’s top job in Limpopo ahead of the party’s provincial conference expected to take place in February. Limpopo premier and ANC provincial chairperson Stan Mathabatha finds himself under pressure to defend his position after availing himself for a second term. Mathabatha will battle for the party’s provincial position with those political heavyweights in the province who didn’t make it on to the ANC’s national executive committee at the elective conference in December. Former ANC deputy provincial chairperson Namane Masemola, former Peter Mokaba regional chairperson Makgabo Mapoulo, and former ANC Youth League provincial chairperson Lehlogonolo Masoga, who is currently deputy speaker at the Limpopo legislature, are believed to be in the running. According to insiders within the ANC provincial executive committee, Mathabatha – who is a strong backer of ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa – will have to work hard to retain his position as failed presidential candidate Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s supporters are gunning for him. Cracks within Mathabatha’s camp are beginning to show following a fallout between him and ANC deputy provincial chairperson, Jerry Ndou, another strong Ramaphosa ally. Mathabatha is said to have replaced Ndou with Vhembe executive mayor Florence Radzilane as his main ally. Provincial treasurer Danny Msiza, who is also a former Mathabatha ally, is believed to be unhappy about Mathabatha’s decision to weaken their campaign by bringing in Radzilane to the picture. Ndou, who commands lots of support in the Vhembe region, refused to be drawn into the succession debate. “What is important is the unity of the ANC during the provincial conference. Therefore it will be disingenuous to comment about the matter before the branch nominations,” he said. Msiza is also being touted by his allies to topple Mathabatha for the top job. However, he is being frustrated because the Sekhukhune region declared that two people from the area cannot contest each other for the same position. When asked for comment, Msiza said: “It will be uncomradely to comment about such things in the media. The ANC’s main focus is unity among its members.” Masoga, who has support from Dlamini-Zuma's chief campaigner and ANC Youth League provincial secretary David Selane, is seen as a dark horse because Mathabatha’s camp is weakened by internal squabbles. “Let’s allow the nomination process to resume before making any comments,” Masoga told City Press when asked if he would contest Mathabatha. However, all is not well for the Dlamini-Zuma camp itself as the provincial executive committee in Limpopo is gunning for ANC provincial secretary Nocks Seabi for allegedly rigging 68 votes in favour of Dlamini-Zuma during the recent ANC elective conference that gave birth to Ramaphosa’s victory. Seabi dismissed allegations levelled against him when pressed for comment. This follows after Cosatu provincial secretary Gerald Twala called for the provincial executive committee to suspend Seabi and investigate the allegations. “It is on this basis that comrade Seabi must be suspended by the ANC provincial executive committee and institute an investigation with regard to the missing 68 votes. Cosatu will engage the ANC about the matter as the allegations are very serious,” Twala said. But Seabi blasted Twala, saying the ANC would engage the federation but Twala’s utterances were skewed and baseless. “I’m elected by branches of the ANC, therefore I will not entertain unfounded allegations,” said Seabi. He would be challenged by former ANC provincial secretary Soviet Lekganyane, who is an ally of former ANC provincial chairperson Cassel Mathale. Mathale didn’t make the cut to the ANC national executive committee. Mathabatha was not available for comment. However, his spokesperson Kenny Mathivha said: “The premier will be available to contest if nominated. However I will not comment about any line-up.”