The ANC has appointed five members of its national executive committee to an interim structure in KwaZulu-Natal to oversee the planning of a provincial conference after the results of the last elective congress were nullified by a court. Aggrieved provincial members had brought the matter against the ANC in May 2016. They won their case, which had challenged the results of the 2015 conference, and saw Sihle Zikalala replace former premier Senzo Mchunu as the provincial chairperson. The provincial executive committee opposed the judgment and launched an appeal. The ANC suspended the provincial executive committees of KwaZulu-Natal and the Free State, which also had its issues, and established an interim structure in KwaZulu-Natal. ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule said in Durban on Tuesday that the national executive committee of the ANC had agreed that the provinces had to find a political solution, especially because both provinces had ANC members who took their provincial executive committees to court. “At the 54th conference, we resolved to solve all our challenges internally.” He said that the five national executive committee members who would oversee the interim structure in KwaZulu-Natal are Edna Molewa, Lindiwe Sisulu, Dakota Legoete, Candith Mashego and Sibongile Besani. Magashule said that Mike Mabuyakhulu would be the convener of the structure, a position he likened to being chairperson. Zikalala, the former provincial executive committee chairperson in KwaZulu-Natal, would be coordinator, a role whose functions he said were similar to that of secretary. Magashule said that it was in the interest of the ANC to suspend KwaZulu-Natal’s provincial executive committee. “During the suspension, we have three months to plan a conference. The provincial executive committee conference should be between March and April. [The] committee of national executive committee members will work and supervise the work of the interim structure.” Magashule said all provincial executive committees had been informed of the national executive committee decision. “They’ve committed themselves to working together and we all agree that we are not in factions.” He reaffirmed that national leadership was “not reconstituting the provincial executive committee”. Read: ANC claims its KZN and Free State PECs still exist “The provincial executive committee is happy with the outcome because they understand the national executive committee has the right to dissolve or suspend a structure, and that’s why the national executive committee met over the weekend,” the party's secretary-general said. He said the powers of the interim structure would be as prescribed in the ANC constitution. “Their primary role will be to take the structures or branches to [the] conference.” Magashule conceded that the power struggle in KwaZulu-Natal had affected service delivery. “I think service delivery was affected and will [continue to be] affected as long as there are divisions, and that’s why our message for this year is unity renewal and jobs.” . – News24