The wife of former bantustan leader Lucas Mangope wife tried in vain to reach an ambulance in a desperate bid to take him to the hospital to save his life. But the family had to organise alternative transport. Unfortunately, it was too late. The former Bophuthatswana president was declared dead moments after his arrival at a nearby hospital last Thursday. The former president’s nephew Bathoeng Mangope told City Press the family was disappointed by the ambulance services which had failed to take a call and respond when the family needed them the most. “If a man of his stature can suffer like this, one can only imagine what happens to ordinary villagers in the same situation. It is disappointing because during [Mangope’s] time in government there was always an ambulance available, even in rural areas,” Bathoeng said. The last nail in Mangope’s coffin was when his family was offered a provincial state funeral by the North West government delegate who visited the family last Sunday. But nothing came of it. On Friday the family decided to continue organising the funeral on its own because there was no word from the provincial government on the funeral status it had offered. “We are only hearing that the presidency has declined the provincial government’s request but nothing has been conveyed to us officially ... we’re puzzled as a family. I believe the provincial government wanted it but presidency declined, but we’re not disappointed,” Bathoeng said, adding that Mangope’s wish was to be buried within four days after his death. “That is what he told his children but, for various reasons, it was not going to be easy to adhere to his wish. We needed more time to organise things properly for a decent burial and there was also this thing of the government plan for a provincial state funeral which had to be taken into consideration,” he said. North West premier Supra Mahumapelo’s spokesperson Brian Setswambung could not explain what had happened. “Following an application the province made to the presidency to accord the funeral of Kgosi Mangope a status, a decision was taken to afford him a civic funeral status,” he said. The presidency did not respond to questions on whether the request was turned down. Mangope’s life was controversial. In 2010 the North West University had planned to have a residence named after him and a bust unveiled in his honour at the university’s 30th birthday celebration. But the plan was thwarted amid wide criticism based on his alleged strong ties to the apartheid government and his failure to show support for the struggle for freedom. Despite this, Mangope attended the event to celebrate the existence of the institution he initiated and had encouraged Bophuthatswana citizens to contribute towards its building. He arrived in a black Audi A8 and was well received before he addressed the gathering as a keynote speaker. He was there on the same grounds where Bophuthatswana police officers had – during his heyday – been accused of brutality whenever they attended students’ protests there. Mangope stubbornly refused on many occasions to work with Nelson Mandela towards the dawn of democracy and refused the ANC to exist and operate freely in Bophuthatswana. He obstinately remained firm and clung on to his government to the last moment even after tens thousands of people died, some at the hands of right-wing armies who had invaded Mafikeng (now Mahikeng) to come to his aid. There was complete pandemonium in Mahikeng, lawlessness reigned, including looting of shops and state offices, and blood spilt, but still Mangope would not budge. Mangope is known to have made it clear that his government would not be part of the new South Africa. It all ended the day Pik Botha and Mac Maharaj walked into his house and told him it was over on March 13 1994. There were celebrations across Bophuthatswana as Mangope moved back to his home village, Motswedi outside Zeerust, where he assumed his old positions as the chief of Bahurutshe boo-Manayana. One can only imagine what went on in his head as visuals of his statues were removed from the Garona government offices complex in Mahikeng and the Lehurutshe Civic Centre in Zeerest. To this day, only one statue still stands tall. It towers over the kgotla (traditional community meeting kraal) in Motswedi. Down the road from there, his mansion remains standing at the foot of the majestic Sekgwakgwa mountains where his soldiers often camped guarding his house from on high. His house is a little unkempt, from the garden to the empty and parched swimming pool and guard rooms which used to house police and soldiers around the clock. This is where Mangope was buried almost in his own yard with the royal family cemetery divided only by a fence from his property. While he has been widely criticised and accused of siding with the apartheid government and against the new democratic government, as well as thwarting the struggle by arresting those daring to bring it into Bophuthatswana, Mangope has also been highly praised for leaving a legacy for the North West government in terms of the legislature. From the university to colleges, pot-hole free tarred roads and lots of government offices, especially in the capital city Mahikeng, Bathoeng said he could only “wonder where will we be now if the ANC took over in 1994 to nothingness”. “What [Mangope] achieved is a good barometer for people to benchmark what he left back then to what we have today.” Mangope went back to politics after the second national government elections and became a member of the provincial legislature after making peace with the fact that things had changed. Always dressed in a tie and jacket, he would often be seen shopping at Mega City shopping centre in Mahikeng or taking a walk in his village. He lived a private life, refusing media interviews. With a lot said about him, he still turned down suggestions from his own when asked to document his own life. “I once asked him why he did not write an autobiography but he didn’t show any interest,” Bathoeng said.