Parliament has welcomed the judgment on the National Assembly’s decision to sanction the Economic Freedom Fighters for disrupting a sitting in August 2014. “The Western Cape High Court issued a discharge of the rule nisi issued by Judge [Dennis] Davis in December 2014,” Parliament said in a statement on Monday. A rule nisi means the ruling of a court becomes final unless one or both parties show cause for it not to be. At the time, the interim order by Davis interdicted Parliament from imposing sanctions, which included suspension without pay, on several members of the EFF. However, Parliament said that Monday’s majority judgment also dismissed the application of the EFF and 21 of its members in which they wanted an order to set aside the report of the suspension without pay in respect of certain categories of conduct. No order of costs was made. In August, 2014, EFF MPs disrupted proceedings while President Jacob Zuma was answering questions in Parliament. They refused to leave after National Assembly Speaker Baleka Mbete ordered them out of the National Assembly. Instead they chanted “pay back the money”, referring to former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela’s finding that Zuma repay part of the money for renovations to his Nkandla homestead. The questions, which Zuma was to answer, were published ahead of the sitting, Parliament said. “The court found that the Speaker was not obliged to ensure that the answers given by the president are ‘meaningful’.” The court also found that the Speaker had no power to determine how questions put to the president were answered. “It confirmed that ensuring that she maintains order during proceedings was the Speaker’s primary obligation,” Parliament said. The court said: “Each and every institution has rules constituting a cornerstone on which such institution is built ... Parliament in its wisdom designed and promulgated these rules. The least expected of members of Parliament is to adhere to them … to enable Parliament as an institution to function and achieve whatever is scheduled for the session. Parties may challenge the rules but that must be done properly and in an orderly fashion in courts.” Parliament said the ruling affirmed the “correctness of its internal due processes” and welcomed the court’s “upholding of the sacrosanct constitutional principle of separation of powers”.