The City of Johannesburg is greatly concerned about the increase in listeriosis cases, especially since Gauteng has the most reported cases of the bacterial disease in the country. On January 16, there were 459 listeriosis cases reported in the province, with 212 cases from Johannesburg. On Thursday, Dr Mpho Phalatse, a member of the mayoral committee for health and social development, together with the city’s health officials presented an awareness campaign at Johannesburg Park Station to educate members of the public in hopes of containing the spread of the disease. “There were 733 reported cases [nationally] as of January 9 and the number had increased to 764 by the 16th, with the Gauteng province having reported 16 more cases,” said Dominic Mahlangu, strategic advisor of the municipality’s mayoral committee. Listeriosis is a disease caused by the listeria bacteria and spreads through contaminated food or water. “If we work together and be vigilant in our own spaces we can stop the spread of listeriosis and avoid unnecessary deaths. We are facing huge challenges as wrong information is spreading about listeriosis. That is why it’s important that we continue the campaign,” said Phalatse While anyone is susceptible to this bacterial disease, people who are most at risk are children, the elderly, pregnant women and individuals with a weak immune system. “The City of Johannesburg has activated environmental health outbreak units to monitor all food outlets and also assist to educate communities on what steps to take to remain safe. It is important to tell people to always take precautionary measures and to avoid certain foods that might cause listeriosis if not prepared accordingly,” said Mahlangu. Symptoms are usually mild and may include fever, muscle aches and nausea or diarrhoea. In cases where the infection has spread to the central nervous system, symptoms of headaches, confusion, loss of balance, a stiff neck or convulsions may be prevalent, and infection can cause meningitis. “Listeriosis is a treatable disease. However, it could be fatal in case of complications,” said Mahlangu. The city advised people to practice good hygiene habits, food safety and to avoid high risk foods such as unpasteurised milk and dishes that are not heated or reheated correctly. Phalatse said campaigns across the city’s seven regions will continue in key areas, like taxi ranks and clinics.