One of the country’s municipalities which forms part of a tri-nation trade agreement – between the cities of Mbombela and Nkomazi in South Africa, Matola in Mozambique and Mbabane in Swaziland – has allegedly been using funds to sustain the accord’s office to run a parallel programme. Municipalities in the Umsebe Accord that have not made contributions to its office in Mbombela since it was set up in 2016 are Nkomazi and Mbombela in South Africa and Matola in Mozambique. A document, seen by City Press, shows that Mbombela committed R2 million towards the office’s fund, Nkomazi R1 million, Matola R700 000 and Mbabane R400 000. But only Mbabane contributed its promised amount to the accord, meant to create seed funding that was expected to be R4.1 million. Nkomazi municipality should have paid its contribution by June 18. Lack of funds and support has resulted in Umsebe Accord chief executive officer Mandisa Mkhonto being made redundant. She allegedly has not been paid a salary since May. Mkhonto was expected to canvass and raise funds for the Umsebe office once she was settled, but that has not happened because there is no money. City Press has seen a document which appears to show that Nkomazi municipal manager Dan Ngwenya could have been using his municipality’s money – meant for accord’s coffers – to perform Umsebe office-related activities without Mkhonto’s knowledge. The proof is in a letter dated July 3 in which Ngwenya invited representatives of the municipalities to an annual intermunicipal protocol plenary meeting at Rio Vista Lodge in Malelane. Despite Mkhonto being in office, she was not aware of this event and neither was she invited. Nkomazi municipality spokesperson Cyril Ripinga said he would look into the matter. “I will have to double check,” he said. But he had not responded by the time of publication. Mkhonto’s troubles started when she allegedly refused to occupy a new office that had been secured for her at Orchards Shopping Centre in Mbombela. Mbombela officials had not followed proper supply-chain management processes when the R22 000 a month office was procured. Although Mkhonto declined to comment, a source said there was no written agreement given to her as the accounting officer to sign. She apparently sought advice from Umsebe Accord board members and secured a cheaper office costing R6 000 a month. Mkhonto, according to the source and board minutes, was told to refund the Mbombela municipality R257 000 that was paid towards the office she refused to occupy. Mbombela spokesperson Joseph Ngala declined to comment. Because of the office’s inadequate funding the bookkeeper had also not received a salary. The SA Revenue Service and the Unemployment Insurance Fund have not been paid and the company’s website was shut down because a service provider was allegedly owed money. The Umsebe Accord was signed in 2012 and has since been registered as a non-profit organisation. The municipalities decided to set up the accord when Mbombela municipality was bidding to be one of the host cities for the 2010 Fifa World Cup games. One of Mbombela’s selling points was that it would use its proximity to Mozambique and Swaziland to fill stadiums by attracting spectators from those countries.