One Mandela family member who will not be at the Global Citizen concert today is Mandla Mandela, whose fourth wife, Nosekeni Rabia Mandela, gave birth to twins in Cape Town on Friday. Mandla’s mother, Nolusapho, told City Press from Cape Town that the entire family was thrilled and “feeling blessed” with the new arrivals, a girl and a boy. “We are overjoyed. We are very excited. We are grateful that we concluded the centenary of uTata on such a high note. We have marked the 100-year anniversary of Madiba in style and we are really, really happy,” she said. The fact that the twins were born the week before the fifth anniversary of Mandela’s death proved “things were really looking up”. “Things are bright and we are excited as a family. We are really blessed.” She said that the twins had not yet been named. In a statement released on Friday afternoon, Mandla gushed: “What are little boys made of? Snips and snails and puppy-dogs’ tails. That’s what little boys are made of. What are little girls made of? Sugar and spice and all things nice. That’s what little girls are made of. “We are overjoyed today to welcome our new bundles of joy.” Mandela added that his and Rabia’s eldest son, Mntwanenkosi Mandela Ikraam Mandela, was now a big brother, and that Mvezo Komkhulu was “about to hear the pitter-patter of little feet again. Our family is growing by 20 more fingers and 20 more toes.” In October last year during the centenary celebrations of Oliver Tambo in Mbizana, Mandla proudly showed off his eldest son in public for the first time. “We all came out as the royal family. Being the next generation of this royal family, he could not miss such an occasion. These are the legacies and stories that should be entrenched in his memory, that he was part of such a chapter in life,” he said. News of Rabia’s pregnancy began spreading during Madiba’s centenary celebrations in Mvezo in July. Nkosi Thanduxolo Mtirara, spokesperson of the Ngangelizwe royal family, said: “We are very happy as the royal family. We are even more happy that the family is expanding after they were blessed with the first child and now the twins. We are truly happy and grateful because children bring joy and happiness to our lives. “The grandson of the house of Ngangelizwe is blessed and therefore we say congratulations to him and his family.”