The music was pumping, everyone was dancing and suddenly the rainstorm came, sending revellers in all directions as they ran for cover, but one of them never came back to enjoy the rest of the festival after the downpour died – she had just died. When many others returned to enjoy the hip-hop tunes, a woman laid at the back of the stadium in pain. Minutes later, just after paramedics and a doctor arrived to treat her, she succumbed to her injuries. The deceased, a woman, is believed to have fallen to her death from one of the high levels of Mahikeng Stadium, North West, around 1am today. She was among thousands of revellers who attended the annual Maftown Heights hip-hop event. Police were yet to identify the deceased. “We are investigating a case of inquest following an incident in which an unidentified woman estimated to be in her twenties fell from Mahikeng Stadium at approximately 1am on Saturday. It appears she was discovered by a security official who alerted the emergency personnel and was still alive when they got to her, but sadly passed on while treated by a doctor on the scene,” said police spokesperson Brigadier Sabata Mokgwabone. “The deceased is wearing blue denim pants with black top written PARIS. She is also wearing black socks with grey stripes.” Chaos erupted at the event after the rain swept through the venue in which thousands have been dancing in the open soccer field. With nowhere else to run for cover, they ran up the stadium stands in search of anywhere they could hide from the rainstorm. Other’s invaded the VIP marquees. Mokgwabo said although no one has said they have seen the deceased fall from the stadium, injuries sustained strongly suggest she had fallen. It was also not known how high she had fallen from. He said police have asked those with information that could help with the identity of the deceased to contact them. Many left the stadium this morning unaware that someone who had earlier been dancing among them, had just died. As the downpour led many to run for cover, others stayed on and continued dancing in the rain while some could be seen pretending to be falling as the hit song about fainting known as “idibala” or “malwede” by Limpopo artist King Monada played. Among those who performed at the event was Mahikeng-born hip-hop artists Cassper Nyovest, Khuli Chana and the trio; Morafe. The line-up also had Riky Rick, Emtee and Okmalumkoolkat, among others. The hip-hop event is part of the North West-sponsored Mahika Mahikeng cultural festivities, which kicked off with a gospel music event on Thursday, comedy festival tonight and will close with a jazz extravaganza headlined by American Grammy Award winner and soul singer Anthony Hamilton happening tomorrow.    