The ANC-led Gert Sibande District council has caused an outcry after hiring 24-hour protection for its manager without getting a go-ahead from the provincial police commissioner, General Mondli Zuma. Municipal manager Cijimpi Habile has been under protection since November 12, after he allegedly received threatening messages on his cellphone from an unknown number. However, the council did not wait for a threat and risk assessment report from Zuma to determine if Habile’s life was, in fact, in danger or not. The councillors went ahead and provided the manager with round-the-clock security and have so far spent R61 000, which will be a monthly cost. The threats, according to documents City Press has seen, were sent via three text messages in June this year. City Press has seen a letter that district acting municipal manager Mthandeni Mkhonza wrote to Zuma on June 13 requesting the threat and risk assessment. “We kindly request your office to conduct an urgent security threat and risk assessment on our municipal manager, CA Habile, following death threats made on his life recently through [text messages] from the following number…” reads Mkhonza’s letter. “Please note that a case on the matter has been opened with the SA Police Service in Ermelo. “It would be appreciated if the assessment report can be received as soon as possible – by the end of business tomorrow, June 14 2018 – in order for our office to act swiftly on the matter,” he added. After this letter, no response was received from Zuma and therefore no report was tabled before the council to decide whether Habile needed security or not. DA councillor Muso Kubheka and a senior municipal official said the decision was irregular since there was no assessment by Zuma. “Processes were not followed. They appointed the bodyguards before getting the risk assessment report from the provincial police commissioner,” Kubheka said. The official, who commented on condition of anonymity, said: “The ANC chief whip, Trevor Nkosi, also got bodyguards when he said he got an SMS from a Swaziland number which said: ‘One bullet is enough for you.’ It is their modus operandi to secure bodyguards. “The SMS [to Habile] probably came from a number that’s not registered and therefore one cannot be sure if there is a real threat,” he added. However, the council took a resolution on the matter earlier this month, according to council minutes. The minutes show that the council was expected to condone and approve the hiring of bodyguards. The text message, written in isiZulu, which City Press has seen, reads: “Running away will not help you. Eventually we will find you. We want you dead. Do you know what, we’re done with you and the sad part is that your son will die too. Let’s see if you will be alive by Friday, clever.” District spokesperson Lungisizwe Mkhwanazi said the council acted “as a precautionary measure since no response was forthcoming [from Zuma]”. In May this year, executive mayor Muzi Chirwa’s security was beefed up after an Umkhonto weSizwe Veterans’ Association member was shot dead during an ANC Youth League regional conference in Badplaas. Habile is not the first Mpumalanga municipal manager to get bodyguards. In 2014, former Emalahleni manager Theo van Vuuren hired about 20 bodyguards for himself and senior managers. That cost ballooned to more that R20 million.