Homeowners in villages surrounding the popular beaches of the Wild Coast have been urged to open up their homes to tourists and visitors as formal establishments are starting to get fully booked. Oscar Mabuyane, MEC for economic development, environmental affairs and tourism in the Eastern Cape, said the Wild Coast had proved to be popular among holidaymakers. Some of the most popular beaches that are the destination of choice in the Wild Coast include Mqanduli in Coffee Bay, Hole in the Wall and Second Beach in Port St Johns. Mabuyane said the provincial government wanted tourists to feel safe and at home in the Eastern Cape during this festive season. “We are welcoming tourists here, domestic and international tourists. They must feel at home. People must open up their homes to international tourists,” said Mabuyane, adding that local villagers should invite visitors to traditional ceremonies, such as imigidi [initiates’ graduation ceremonies]. “People all over the world should understand our culture. In the Eastern Cape we continue to say that you cannot talk tourism outside culture. “Our culture becomes key in the tourism sector we are speaking about. So, we are quite happy that we have managed to reach this and our people are ready to welcome everyone back home.” Mayor Dumani Zozo of King Sabata Dalindyebo municipality said the area was becoming a popular holiday destination given its great opportunities. He said new towns had been established in Coffee Bay and Hole in The Wall and a road between the two beaches had been constructed. “Visitors have shown much interest in going to these places which are not that well known by many people. “For most travellers Coffee Bay is a nice place to be. And Hole in the Wall is the eighth wonder we have.” Zozo said the Wild Coast was special because it was untapped and had not been converted from its natural wonder. “In the Wild Coast you find walking/hiking trails from Hole in the Wall to Coffee Bay, moving down to Kei Mouth. Every one of those beaches is connected by walking trails,” he said. “We also have visitors from all over who would like to explore the walking trails. It has become safe for them, but we still call on visitors to walk in groups for those who might not want to take chances,” Zozo said.