2018 has been yet another tough year for the country’s health system. And while we wait to hear about the much anticipated presidential blueprint for fixing it, we look at the big issues which affected the sector this year. Life Esidimeni The Life Esidimeni tragedy that saw 144 patients die following their transferral to local community NGOs blew the lid on the shocking state of mental health services in the country’s public sector. Presided over by Justice Dikgang Moseneke, the hearings revealed details of the gross neglect and abuse that the patients suffered at the hands of those who were responsible for their care. The hearings ended on February 9 this year. In March, Moseneke ruled that each claimant should be paid R20 000 for funeral expenses. Government was also ordered to pay R180 000 to each claimant for general damages for shock and psychological trauma, as well as R1 million each as appropriate relief. The total compensation per claimant was R1.2 million. This month, it was confirmed that more than 300 additional family members who lodged new compensation claims following the hearings would also be paid out. Listeriosis The country started off the year still in the throes of polony panic, as the “world’s worst outbreak” of the food-borne disease – listeriosis – continued to take hold. In just less than a year, more than 200 people died of listeriosis – mostly babies younger than 28 days old – and more than 1 000 people were confirmed to have the disease. In October, the outbreak was declared officially over. The Tiger Brands’ Enterprise Foods facility in Polokwane was identified as the source of listeria in South Africa. Now Tiger Brands faces a class-action lawsuit involving 150 adults and children affected by the outbreak. Deputy Judge President Phineas Mojapelo certified the Wendy Mnguni and others v Tiger Brands class action earlier this month. Private health sector In July, the Competition Commission’s Health Market Inquiry released their provisional findings on the country’s private sector after a more than four-year-long investigation. The commission – chaired by former chief justice Sandile Ngcobo – found that the sector was characterised by high and rising costs of healthcare and medical scheme cover, disempowered and uninformed consumers, and a general absence of value-based purchasing. According to Ngcobo, the private healthcare sector displayed consistently rising medical scheme premiums accompanied by increasing out-of-pocket payments for the insured, almost stagnant growth in covered lives and a progressively decreasingly range and depth of services covered by scheme options. Their final report is expected in March. Baby deaths Two Gauteng hospitals were at the centre of the shocking deaths of babies as a result of disease outbreaks. Nine babies died from an outbreak of necrotising enterocolitis at the Rahima Moosa Mother and Child Hospital while six babies died from a Klebsiella pneumonia outbreak at the Thelle Mogoerane Hospital. The SA Human Rights Commission said that the Rahima Moosa Hospital was “in violation of infants’ right to access to good quality healthcare”, following an oversight visit to the hospital. Health building safety Not only is the country’s healthcare system in poor shape, but so is the building that houses the national Department of Health. Employees at the Civitas building in Pretoria held protests against what they said were poor working conditions. Among the issues they raised were ventilation systems, activators and sprinkler systems in the building which were not in working order. The Department of Labour closed Civitas in October, declaring it unsafe. The building was re-opened a few days later after the health department appealed, promising to do the necessary repairs.