Former SABC chief operations officer Hlaudi Motsoeneng has his hopes pinned on becoming the next president of South Africa. Motsoeneng, who announced the formation of his political party – the African Content Movement (ACM) – in Johannesburg on Wednesday, said that he would be contesting Cyril Ramaphosa’s presidency during the 2019 national elections. “I’m contesting President Cyril Ramaphosa because he is the one who is in charge. I want to be the president, that is the bottom line,” the embattled former SABC boss said. Motsoeneng outlined policies which he intends on introducing based on an ‘African-first’ focus. “Anything that we produce in South Africa will be 90 percent South African because it is very important to empower people of South Africa. We need to start here at home,” he said. In June last year, Motsoeneng was fired from his post at the SABC after bringing the broadcaster into disrepute following a media conference in April, which outlined his decision to introduce a 90% local content policy across the SABC radio platforms. At the conference he also accused former SABC board member Krish Naidoo of being a “sell-out”. According to its name, the movement is looking at the “emancipation of the economy” and introducing affordable health care services. With its slogan, ‘The future is in your hands’, Motsoeneng said that the formation of the party was born out of the need to provide services to citizens, something he said that current political parties fail to do. Motsoeneng said that he would be putting an end to social grants in the country as “they build a lazy nation”. “In South Africa, people will always ask you what you can do for them and not what they can do for themselves. People need opportunities and not grants,” he said. He was also critical of the ruling party, and slammed the ANC for side-lining former president Jacob Zuma. “They removed Msholozi [Zuma] from the leadership role because they said he was bad for campaigning ahead of next year’s elections, but now they are using his face for campaigning,” he said. He also said that his party was for all races and that the party was to “serve the people”. “We will launch our party next year in January. We are making announcements and we will deal with some critical issues such as land distribution and education during our conference this morning,” he said. On December 6, Motsoeneng appeared at the South Gauteng High Court, where he argued against the SABC which sought an interim order to prevent him from being paid his “success bonus” of R11.5 million from the broadcaster’s pension fund. He promised supporters outside the court that he would become president of the country.