Eleven employees of the social development department have complained about being belittled, humiliated and ridiculed in front of other colleagues at its headquarters. “We have been subjected to these dehumanising incidents on a daily basis for years now with no intervention from the ministry. “Every time a colleague is called into the office of the chief financial officer [Clifford Appel] you know they are going to come out crying. That man is a bully who ridicules black employees and takes pleasure in threatening to fire us without any justifiable reasons,” said former director of supply chain Sihle Mndaweni and another employee who refused to have his name published because he fears further intimidation. In total 11 employees have expressed displeasure about the manner in which the director of the social development department, Dan Naidoo; Appel; his personal assistant, Yolandi Klien; and other senior officials treat them. They have articulated their grievances in a petition addressed to acting director-general Mzolisi Toni. “We first made the former minister, Bathabile Dlamini, and the former acting director-general, Nelisiwe Vilakazi, aware of these issues and a committee was set up to investigate but nothing was done. The matter was closed,” said the employees. Social Development Minister Susan Shabangu acknowledged to City Press that she has been made aware of the complaints lodged on a number of issues by the said employees. “The matter is being attended to with the relevant departmental authorities following approved government processes,” said Shabangu. She has set up a panel that includes Toni to hold hearings with the senior officials named by the employees. “We confirm that the said officials first received a hearing from Toni and that they were advised in writing as to what is being done to resolve the matter,” said Shabangu. The disgruntled employees expressed a lack of faith in the department, saying even under former minister Dlamini’s era similar promises were made. However, a committee constituting “an all-white team was assembled and was not objective” in the manner in which they approached their complaints. Mndaweni, who resigned from the department in October because of the ill treatment, said he was appalled that “in 2018, living in a democratic South Africa, black employees still experienced such segregation and racially motivated mistreatment”. “This is why I ended up resigning as I had tried all avenues to have these matters addressed but all attempts fell on deaf ears,” said Mndaweni. “Appel is heartless; he blows everything out of proportion. A colleague not so long ago requested a day off as her child was ill. He told her tobring the child to work so that he could tell if the child was genuinely ill,” said one of the disgruntled workers. The employees claimed the working conditions were toxic since senior management – which is rightfully supposed to have the interests of workers at heart – are the ones who have turned to “terrorising employees”. Social development spokesperson Thulisile Nhlako said these were serious allegations and what was worrying was that senior officials at level 14 were accused of mistreating levels five, six or seven employees, meaning that such employees ended up feeling as if there was no recourse since their seniors were the ones perpetrating the alleged mistreatment. She reiterated that the minister and the director-general were giving the matter the urgency it deserved as these were “very serious allegations”. Numerous senior employees have resigned from the department because of what they called “unhealthy and dehumanising working conditions”. “It is better to stay at home than to come here and be insulted. We are insulted in the corridors and in front of other colleagues; we are forever being told that we don’t think, that we don’t use our heads,” said an employee. Appel has been chief financial officer of the department since December 2014. 