Mabuza’s rise Quite frankly, Mpumalanga’s 2018 can only be remembered as the year when it struggled to identify itself outside its former leader, David Mabuza. Since Mabuza was elected ANC deputy president in December 2017 and had relocated to the Union Buildings as the country’s second-in-command in February, an unprecedented scramble for power ensued. Suddenly, there were nine contenders to replace Mabuza as provincial ANC chairperson. Mabuza’s reign since 2008 had gone unchallenged – resulting in him staying on for three consecutive terms as chairperson. Mpumalanga’s provincial general council failed to sit since April to elect Mabuza’s replacement and it seems unlikely that it will sit before the general elections next year. First female premier For the first time in history, Mpumalanga had its first female premier. Luthuli House appointed Refilwe Mtshweni (45) – a former cooperative governance and traditional affairs MEC – to replace Mabuza when he went to the presidency. Despite having no key position in the ANC, particularly in the provincial or regional executive committee, Mtshweni appears to have gained some support. This became clear when her name came out tops in the province to province list – giving her a better chance to retain her position after the 2019 general elections. Mpumalanga’s air pollution Analysis of satellite data has revealed that Mpumalanga is now the world’s largest air pollution hotspot across the six continents. Mpumalanga’s highveld region is host to twelve coal-powered electricity stations, which generate more than 80% of the country’s power. Environmental organisations have continued to fight the establishment of new coal mines – which are also responsible for acid water drainage and sterilisation of arable soils. PSL dream alive This season, Mpumalanga has four teams competing in the National First Division (NFD). This can only bode well for the province and spur hope that, come the 2019/20 season, Mpumalanga will have a team in the Premier Soccer League. The four NFD teams carrying the province’s hopes are TS Sporting, Mbombela United, Witbank Spurs and TS Galaxy.