Set in a deep rural area of KwaZulu-Natal – in Godloza, Ezingoleni Rural to be exact – did not stop Ebomvini Primary School, an underresourced school with no library or computer facilities and dependent on the in-school feeding scheme, from putting South Africa on the world map by being awarded the innovation and student’s choice awards for Water Explorer 2018. After realising there was a water crisis, the school took it upon itself to get involved in different environmental projects to save water. The school started with a project called Qhakaza, which was about looking after the school premises, the grounds, walls, the classroom and the garden. “When we realised there was a water crisis in our school, we decided to take care of the environment on the premises by planting indigenous trees. We also have a food garden that helps vulnerable pupils,” said teacher Youth Mavudla. The pupils save water by ensuring tippy-taps – two-litre bottles which are filled with water – are placed in front of every classroom. Pupils use the water to wash their hands when they come back from the toilets and after playing. They created their own water-wise recipe book. Pupils from 11 participating countries – including Turkey, Germany and Malta – agreed that Ebomvini’s projects were creative. They were also impressed with the pupils’ ability to make the projects work despite having limited resources. For the two girls, Asiphile Mkhonde and Esihle Gasa, who went to Canary Wharf in London to represent the school at the awards ceremony, it was an eye-opener. The girls had not left their home town before, let alone travelled abroad. Mkhonde, a Grade 7 pupil, was so inspired that she now wants to become a medical doctor. “I want to become a doctor – but right now I am thinking of venturing into agriculture because the project motivated me. I love the project and I want to encourage young people to also start saving water because water is life.” Gasa, also in Grade 7, believes the project helped her to learn how to research issues. “When the teacher introduced me to the project I really liked it and I wanted to be part of it. The process of cleaning up and looking after the pond was helpful and it taught me a lot about nature.” School principal Nomvuyo Maureen Sebenza said she was proud of the pupils for the wonderful job they did and are continuing to do. “I am happy that the school is now recognised at an international level and that the children did such an amazing job. The project is really imperative because it helps to save water and keep our environment clean.” The programme was implemented in South Africa by the African Conservation Trust.