An Mpumalanga businessman’s ambitious plan to sell houses to low-income earners within six years has sparked a fierce court battle. Developer Themba Sigudla is at loggerheads with the Emalahleni Housing Company over the ownership of 5 000 units in Tasbet Park and Duvha in Emalahleni, which he intends on selling to tenants. Tasbet Park was Sigudla’s pilot project of the plan. Government built the units back in 2000 as part of a programme to house low-income earners who earned too much to be allocated RDP houses and too little to be approved for mortgage bonds by the bank However, the Emalahleni Local Municipality signed a land availability agreement in 2003, which favoured and entitled the developer, Anchorprops 31 (Pty) Ltd, owned by Sigudla, to profit from the sale of the social housing units that were built with public funds. It is unclear how and why the municipality signed away government-owned houses. This has now given the businessman a leg to stand on and he has been trying to replace and take the responsibility of the Emalahleni Housing Company to collect rental and manage the settlements. The housing company used to collect about R3.7 million a month in rental from the units, but since Sigudla dissuaded the residents from paying rent in October, the company has been collecting less and as much as 80% of debit orders are being reversed. In September, Sigudla, who is the president of the ANC-aligned pressure group Practical Radical Economic Transformation (Pret), launched his ambitious Thuma Mina Housing Project at Ackerville Stadium in Emalahleni. He has been known to be Deputy President David Mabuza’s ally for many years, but their relationship appears to have gone frosty recently as a result of Pret’s stance on certain political issues. Through the project, Sigudla has promised to meet government halfway and build the low-income earners houses that they can pay off in six years. He said his housing project would first begin by launching the Thuma Mina Human Settlement System, a community online database system. Emalahleni Housing Company chief executive George Xaba has since obtained a restraining order against Sigudla for defaming him and the company during community meetings and interfering in the company’s contract with tenants by telling them not to pay their rent. Xaba has approached the courts to try to set aside the land availability agreement and have it declared illegal. The case is scheduled for May next year in the Pretoria High Court. “This agreement was drafted to favour the developer to be able to sell the units on land owned by the municipality. A private individual cannot sell houses owned by government,” Xaba said. However, Sigudla insisted that the agreement was valid, but could not comment further because of the restraining order against him. In his response, Emalahleni spokesperson Kingdom Mabuza said: “The municipality is the owner of the land where the units have been built. There is a court case to determine who the units belong to and out of respect for that court process we prefer to limit our comment on the land question and leave the ownership of the houses to the court to decide.”