 18:46 RT @AndiMakinana: City Press also understands that only one ANC MP objected to Zuma's recall in today's caucus meeting. The MP is an NEC member and had registered the objection in the marathon NEC meeting as well.    RT @AndiMakinana: City Press understands that the ANC hasn't removed anything from the EFF motion but has simply added its own submissions. About Zuma defying the ANC NEC    Gupta latest: Atul in talks, Ajay officially under arrest Tense negotiations were still under way by Wednesday evening with the lawyers of five suspects arrested by the Hawks in connection with the R220 million looted from the failed diary farm in Vrede, Free State. City Press understands that elder Gupta brother Ajay was officially arrested while middle brother Atul Gupta, was in discussions with the Hawks, through his lawyer, to hand himself over. Continue reading here    ‘Victimised’ Zuma says he is not defying ANC, just disagrees with them President Jacob Zuma says he has not defied the leadership of the ANC by refusing to step down but he simply disagreed with their reasons.In an interview with the SABC on Wednesday, Zuma said that he would not resign but he would issue a statement later in the day. READ more here    President Jacob Zuma surprised the nation with a live interview with the SABC this afternoon. Here are five telling statements from the interview READ: I am not being defiant. I disagree - Zuma    16:17  The ANC is briefing the media after Zuma's SABC interview RT @SthembileCel: #ZumaExit Mabe says the ANC is comforted by the line in Zuma's interview, "where he said, 'I will not defy the ANC."   16:11  RT @AndiMakinana: This is the EFF motion and it lists reasons why the National Assembly should remove President Zuma from office. pic.twitter.com/JtJtg8zaVC   16:11  RT @AndiMakinana: DA chief whip John Steenhuisen: It would be undesirable for an acting President to deliver Sona. Our preference is for a swearing-in and a president to deliver Sona so that we can be able to hold him accountable.  16:10  RT @AndiMakinana: Speaker Mbete says they have proposed to proceed with an Acting President into Sona and the budget. Then, he [the President] can deal with the rest of the other business, "whatever juggling in the executive". But we in parliament must dispense with our business.   15:20  RT @AndiMakinana: The ANC has issued a statement saying it will await President Zuma's statement that he has promised to deliver in response to the decision to recall him.   15:12  This was President Jacob Zuma's first public address to the nation since the transition talks started. Recap what he said in this thread. #ZumaResponds #ZumaSpeaks https://t.co/sZqETLDGcl   15:04  RT @SthembileCel: #ZumaExit interview is done. Now we wait for the official statement. Which may or not be a resignation   15:02  RT @SthembileCel: #ZumaExit Zuma says this interview was just to "narrate," the sequence of events and to dispel myth of him being defiant. Says an official response will come via statement later today   14:52  RT @JKwritingz: Zuma: At no stage have I ever said to the ANC leadership that the decision they have made is not right, but in this case I feel like this particular decision is not right. I feel victimized #ZumaExit   14:52  RT @AndiMakinana: Zuma says he presented a package. That he agrees to resign but in June.The officials accepted that he wants to resign, but rejected the delay.He says he wouldn't accept that. They must accept his "package" as a whole and not dismantle it.   14:40  RT @SthembileCel: #ZumaExit Zuma says there is a perception on the continent that he is, "being elbowed out,' says this is why it is so important for Zuma to personally introduce Ramaphosa to continental structures   14:40  RT @AndiMakinana: Zuma: I will resign, but it's a question of timeframes. I wanted to resign after June.   14:26  RT @SthembileCel: #ZumaExit Zuma says he told the officials to go tell the NWC, " I do not accept this persuasion that I must resign, I don't understand it." This was the Sunday evening meeting   14:17  RT @SthembileCel: #ZumaExit Zuma says he doesn't think the current ANC leadership understand what two centres of powers means, it is not at play now. Says he explained to officials who appear to have "immature politics of analysing."    14:17  RT @AndiMakinana: Zuma: At the discussions at the NEC, nobody has provided reasons, nobody has said what have I done.    14:16  RT @AndiMakinana: PRESIDENT ZUMA IS RESPONDING.He says he needs to be furnished with what he has done.If he has done something wrong, there are processes in the ANC.    14:11 President Jacob Zuma is speaking to the SABC. See below for the live stream:    13:54  Speaker of the National Assembly Baleka Mbete has agreed to reschedule the EFF's motion of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma. The vote will take place on Thursday February 15 at 2pm. The voting will be done by open ballot.     12:55 And what about the rand? It has strengthened to it's best level since May 2015: RT @JustinBrownSA: The rand has strengthened to 11.79 versus the US dollar. This is the local unit's strongest level since May 2015 on the news that the ANC wants to dump Jacob Zuma as SA President and install Cyril Ramaphosa as the head of the country by tomorrow   12:53  The ANC has set out their prefered sequence of events if Zuma does not resign by today: RT @AndiMakinana: The ANC's plan:Thursday: Remove President Zuma through a Motion of No Confidence and elect new President.Friday: SONAMonday: SONA debateTuesday: President's responseWednesday: Budget    12:44 RT @AndiMakinana: Mthembu says the ANC will amend the EFF motion, not the substance which is about removing but the reasons for removing Zuma. The ANC's reasons will be based on outcomes of #ANC54.    12:42 BREAKING: The ANC in Parliament will table a motion of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma if he does not resign by today in line with the party's decision to recall him.    12:18 The ANC caucus meeting is over, according to our Parliamentary reporter Andisiwe Makinana RT @AndiMakinana: ANC caucus meeting over.     11:47 Meanwhile, ANC's parliamentary caucus meeting is continuing RT @AndiMakinana: ANC MP Mervyn Dirks arrived late for caucus meeting. pic.twitter.com/k1rZiMadad   11:40  This morning the home of Ashok Narayan, a Gupta lieutenant and former managing director of Gupta-owned Sahara Systems, was visited by the Hawks. Our reporters on the ground report that all is quite at the Bedfordview property    11:34  A leaked email to the South African Police Services shows that the presidency had scheduled a briefing for 10am this morning but it was subsequently cancelled.    11:17  The Economic Freedom Fightrers have postponed their urgent application to have the motion of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma brought forward. This after the EFF engaged with the ANC's caucus in Parliament. The EFF has postponed its Urgent Court application for a Motion of No Confidence to be brought forward following engagements with the ruling party caucus in parliament. The public will be adviced as soon as these engagements are concluded.   11:09  The Hawks on Wednesday morning confirmed that the serious corruption crime unit was “conducting ongoing operations at various addresses in Gauteng, including a residential premises in Saxonwold near Johannesburg.” The residential premises is the Gupta family compound. The Hawks confirmed that three people had been arrested and two other suspects were expected to hand themselves over to the Hawks. “Operations are still ongoing and further details will be made available at a later stage.” Although the Hawks have not named those arrested, City Press has learnt from a source close to the Guptas’ legal team that the elder Gupta brother, Ajay Gupta, has been taken in for questioning.     10:29 RT @JKwritingz: The Hawks statement states that the arrests are in regards to the Vrede Farm investigations and that 13 more people are expected to be arrested today from different residences around Johannesburg #GuptaRaid   10:16  An official statement from the Hawks confirms that three people have been arrested, two arrested at the #Gupta residence in #saxonworld and another from a different residence. Two more people are expected to hand themselves in according to the statement. @City_Press  10:09 At least one of the Gupta brothers is set to appear in the Commercial Crimes Court in Bloemfontein later today, reports Abram Mashego. City Press was told by a senior source within the security cluster that the unnamed Gupta brother will be appearing in court alongside former Free State agriculture department head Peter Thabethe. The charges are likely to be fraud, corruption and money laundering. City Press was also told that if the Hawks managed to arrest the other Gupta brother and President Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane this morning, then they would also appear in the dock alongside them.    9:22 While Hawks officers are on the hunt for President Jacob Zuma’s son, Duduzane, as well as one Gupta brother, all was quiet outside Duduzane Zuma’s Saxonwold home this morning, report Abram Mashego, Gayle Edmunds and Dewald van Rensburg. The property at 18 Griswold Drive, which is situated about two blocks away from the Gupta family compound in Saxonwold, is registered under the name of a holding company belonging to Duduzane Zuma and the Gupta family.However, neighbours say that Duduzane Zuma has not been seen or heard at the property for a while now. Neighbours say that they usually hear the sound of his sportscars’ engines, but these have been silent of late. His extensive security – which includes a number of guards on duty around the clock and which is usually highly visible from the street – have also not been there.     9:14 Finally some activity as a car drives into the #Gupta residence in #Saxonwold, it is still unclear who the occupants are pic.twitter.com/nMXOCovVIp   9:07  Photographers find innovative ways of trying to get footage of what’s happening inside the #Gupta residence #Saxonwold @City_Press pic.twitter.com/5WfksiTlQq     9:01 Former Free State agriculture head, Peter Thabethe, has been arrested in connection with his involvement in the failed dairy farm project in Vrede, reports Abram Mashego.Thabethe was the head of department at the time that now-Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane was the MEC for agriculture.A senior security cluster official told City Press that Thabethe was arrested on Wednesday morning after a raid on his home in Bloemfontein early Wednesday morning.Simultaneous raids were conducted on both the Gupta family’s Saxonwold mansions and Thabethe’s house in the Free State capital.The charges Thabethe is likely to face include corruption, fraud, and money laundering.According to a court application attached to a preservation order obtained by the Asset Forfeiture Unit in respect of the dairy project run by Gupta-linked company Estina, Thabethe helped the Gupta family and their business associates syphon off more than R200 million from his department. The money was supposed to have been used to benefit poor black farmers under the province’s Zero Hunger programme.   8:53 Crowds still gathered outside the Gupta Saxonworld residence after the raid and arrest by the Hawks @City_Press pic.twitter.com/ZGEKQU5uus     8:45 Update: The Hawks are trying to locate Duduzane Zuma and another Gupta brother, reports Abram Mashego       8:38 Update: City Press has established that two people have been arrested. More to follow...   As a dramatic raid is carried out on the Gupta family’s Saxonwold compound, City Press has learnt of the imminent arrest of at least two Gupta brothers as well as Duduzane Zuma. City Press was told by a senior source within the security cluster that two Gupta brothers as well as President Jacob Zuma’s son face arrest from today in connection with money laundering, fraud and corruption charges related to the failed dairy farm project in Vrede, Free State. The source was unable to reveal which two of the three Gupta brothers are set to be arrested. However, City Press has established that elder Gupta brother Ajay is in the country. Ajay Gupta was spotted outside the family’s Optimum Coal Mine in Mpumalanga last week. News of the arrests was not yet confirmed by the Hawks. The Hawks have been trying to place the Gupta brothers under arrest for the past two weeks but have been unsure of their whereabouts. They were supposed to have been arrested last Thursday evening.  City Press was told that the men would appear in the Commercial Crimes Court in Bloemfontein on Friday, however the arrests were called off at the eleventh hour because their whereabouts had not been established. The source said at the time: “It’s not a go today yet. We couldn’t locate two important targets.” City Press understands that the Hawks have been working with the department of home affairs in an effort to establish where they are. City Press was told that the suspects would be taken to Bloemfontein after their arrest where they would appear in that city’s Commercial Crimes Court. The security cluster source said that for now, only the two Gupta brothers and Duduzane Zuma face arrest and “no politicians yet”. The politicians in question include Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane, who was the Free State MEC for agriculture at the time. The Guptas, according to a preservation order secured by the Asset Forfeiture Unit, syphoned off more than R200 million from the project which was established under the province’s “Zero Hunger” programme and supposed to assist poor black farmers.  Hawks spokesperson, Hangwani Mulaudzi, was not immediately available for comment. 