Charges of fraud have been laid against former Eskom chief executive Brian Molefe and former Eskom board chair Ben Ngubane. The charges, laid by trade union Solidarity at the Garsfontein Police station in Pretoria on Tuesday morning, relate to the R11 million pension payout that Molefe has already received from the power utility. Last month, the North Johannesburg High Court ruled that Molefe’s reinstatement in 2017 was invalid and he was ordered to pay back the pension amount and all costs. Solidarity claimed that this ruling contains “very strong and decisive remarks justifying criminal charges against Molefe and Ngubane”. In an affidavit sent to the Hawks today the union claimed that, given the judgment already made by the court, “the only reasonable inferences to draw are that Molefe, clearly in concert with Ngubane and other officials of Eskom and the Eskom Pension and Provident Fund, had made himself guilty of a number of criminal offences”. Molefe was reinstated after he had allegedly resigned from Eskom officially from January 1 last year. In February last year Molefe had joined Parliament as an MP, and it had surfaced through an explosive Sunday Times report that he had expected a R30 million pension payout from the power utility. Molefe had only been at Eskom for 18 months. It emerged in May 2017 that he was actually on paid leave and had not resigned as he had previously asserted. He was reinstated as Eskom’s chief executive in May last year. AmaBhungane had revealed that the controversial Gupta family had secured the Optimum coal mine from Glencore in 2015 when Molefe was in constant contact with them. Anton van der Bijl, head of Solidarity’s centre for fair labour practices, said that criminal activities took place and a full investigation needed to happen. “Ultimately we say that this is a civil matter and he must pay back the R11 million. There are criminal activities which took place and it’s up to Parliament and the police services to investigate the matter. We feel that the matter needs to be taken further,” he said. The union has called on the National Prosecuting Authority and the Hawks to investigate the matter further. Another senior member of Eskom, executive support manager Anton Minnaar, has also been identified by the union as being complicit in failing in his legal “duty to disclose unlawful activities”. In December, during the inquiry into state capture, Minnaar testified that Molefe’s R30 million pension pay out was “earned” and lauded Molefe for his role in “stopping load shedding”. “If he can stop load shedding, I will pay him,” Minnaar said at the inquiry. Other Eskom executives have also been embroiled in battles with the law. In July last year, the DA laid criminal charges against the former suspended Eskom chief financial officer, Anoj Singh. The DA accused him of “breaching the Public Finance Management Act”. Following the state capture inquiry, Singh resigned in January this year after being suspended in September 2017.   