Chief executive of Sygnia Tech Solutions, Magda Wierzycka, has taken matters into her own hands announcing that she will be matching the reward money for any information leading to the capture of the Gupta brothers and former president Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane Zuma, boosting the reward to a staggering R1 million. This follows the announcement by non-profit organisation Forensics for Justice this week that a R100 000 would be paid out for any information leading to the arrest of Ajay Gupta, who is considered a fugitive on the run by the Hawks. The no-profit organisation specified that the R100 000 was valid for any information offered before 6pm on Saturday that would led to the arrest of Ajay Gupta. On Saturday however, Forensics for Justice updated their notice adding R100 000 reward for each of the Gupta brothers - Ajay, Atul and Rajesh (Tony) - as well as their business associate Duduzane Zuma. “If all four are arrested on the same information, a further bonus of R100 000 will be paid out,” the notice read. This brought the total reward to R500 000. Responding to this Wierzycka, a vocal critic of the Guptas, said she would match the reward rand for rand effectively doubling the total reward to a R1 million.  Wiezycka explained that “the sooner we catch and convict them, the sooner we can recover R50 billion. That will go much further in rebuilding SA.” Wierzycka sweetened the deal again by offering R200 000 to the first of Ajay’s bodyguards who calls CrimeStop to advise of his location, and another R200 000 to any of the accused in the Vrede Dairy Farm case, in particular those who appeared in court this week, to turn state witness. She said this money could help with their legal fees.  “South Africans, contribute your spy skills. We need these crooks in jail where they belong. As soon as possible,” urged Wiezycka. So far the Hawks have only confirmed that there is a manhunt underway to arrest Ajay, the alleged head of the family. Hawks spokesperson Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi confirmed on Friday that Ajay was in the country and that the special investigating unit was negotiating with the security company protecting him. Police Minister Fikile Mbalula wrote on Twitter: “Suspect Ajay Gupta is evading the law, we have begun to hunt him down. He can run but he can’t hide.” The Gupta family and their associates are alleged to have received over R100 million in funds unlawfully through the Vrede Dairy Farm project which only got 1% of the reported R220 million budgeted for the project. Eight accused, including former Oakbay chief executives Varun Gupta and Nazeem Howa, as well as current chief executive Ronica Ragavan, were arrested in widespread raids conducted by the Hawks on Wednesday. The reward for expires midnight on Sunday.