In the face of the state’s failure to pursue economic crimes by business and political elites, Constitutional Hill in Johannesburg played host to day four of the people’s economic tribunal on economic crime on Tuesday. The focus of the day was the failures of the Seriti Commission, which investigated dealings during the 1999 arms deal saga. The commission “was unable to critically compare evidence” as it refused to engage with evidence of corruption that is in the public domain, according to Basetsana Molebatsi, attorney at Harris Nupen Molebatsi which represents the Right2Know Campagin. This led to a “one-sided process”, she said. Molebatsi expressed that should this tribunal achieve anything, it should be to convince the public that the findings of the Seriti Commission ought to be “set aside as there were flaws in its approach”. Why a People’s Tribunal? In the 24 years since 1994 a number of commissions of inquiry have been instituted by the state and its various arms. However, the tribunal believes the sheer number of these inquiries has made it tedious for ordinary South Africans to follow these processes that are meant to hold those in power accountable. Civil society organisations therefore convened this tribunal on economic crime to hold those who have escaped culpability to account. The tribunal was organised by the Center for Applied Legal Studies, Corruption Watch, Foundation for Human Rights, Open Secrets, Public Affairs Research Institute and the Right2Know Campaign. It is meant to join the dots on the “long shadow of economic crime in South Africa” as it addresses areas where “the state has failed to adequately investigate and prosecute serious allegations of corruption”, according to Open Secrets. This tribunal is the first of its kind to specifically address crimes of corruption and theft all the way back to apartheid, while also focusing on “the 1999 arms deal and the current state capture”. “The terms of reference of the tribunal is to fill in the gaps ... show that there was evidence that was never considered [particularly in the Seriti Commission] and to fortify our client’s [Right2Know] case that the commission is not valid,” said Molebatsi. According to Open Secrets, “by recognising citizens’ right to truth, these processes help to develop a historic record of crimes and institutional failure, thus contributing to the realisation of justice in the present”. What sets it apart from the numerous other commissions? If day four of the tribunal was anything to go by, this People’s Tribunal is “not meant for establishing factual findings but as a platform to build a prima facie case for the need for previous commissions to be further reinvestigated”, explained tribunal evidence leader advocate Frances Hobden. Hobden introduced Khaya Sithole, a chartered accountant who has also worked as an academic and a media contributor, to expand on the private sector and state capture. “The general understanding of economic crime is limited. Even the judiciary has a limited understanding of economic crime; that is why there is a low prosecution rate,” Sithole explained. “Our judiciary finds itself unable to prove and prosecute economic crimes, which leads to instances where they have to negotiate with parties that are involved in these crimes in exchange for immunity, and only if they are able to provide evidence of foul play.” Sithole touched on a major aspect that sets the tribunal apart from commissions of inquiry. Instead of attempting to provide findings, give advice or make recommendations, the aim of this tribunal is to educate the public. Sithole demonstrated this in his explanation of what state capture entails – “a state that exists but does not have the capacity to do what it has been put in power to accomplish, leading to it having to solicit the means of implementation from the private sector. A good example of this was the South African Social Security Agency [which uses a private company to pay grants].” Desired outcomes Legally, Molebatsi and Hobden explained that they seek to build a prima facie case for either the setting aside of the finding of previous commissions of inquiry or the reinvestigation of these commissions through the tribunal’s demonstration that there is evidence that was never considered in the commissions. As well as highlighting that “there is new evidence that has subsequently come forward that may change the finding or recommendations of the previous inquiry”. These civil society organisations also seek to join the dots and demonstrate that there has been a “long shadow of economic crime in South Africa” and that these are not isolated incidents. Sithole said that the public has to be educated and informed on the outcomes of the previous commissions of inquiry and what led to such outcomes.