Acting Mpumalanga ANC chairperson, Mandla Ndlovu, is in pole position to be elected to the top job after an endorsement from his predecessor, David Mabuza. This, however, depends on whether Mabuza has not lost his tight grip on the province following his departure from Mpumalanga after he was appointed deputy president of the country. Mabuza’s farewell speech to ANC members after he delivered the state of the province address on Friday did not go down well with the other contenders for the position. READ: Ramaphosa’s balancing act means sticking with Mabuza as deputy Mabuza heaped praise on Ndlovu who has been provincial secretary since 2015. “I think I taught him what is right and wrong. He’s a humble man [who] can [fit] in my shoes and even take my shoes,” Mabuza said of Ndlovu. “Treat Mpumalanga people well and know that I have a bond with them. I, however, trust him. When everybody is angry, he remains calm. What I like about him, he has a gift to help other people,” he said. Ndlovu is a former secretary in Bohlabela region. He was elected into the provincial secretariat when Mabuza assumed his third term as provincial chairperson. Mabuza’s support is a big boost for Ndlovu’s campaign. Ndlovu is the only candidate with running mates among the six other contenders. He is campaigning alongside Nkangala regional chairperson and human settlements MEC, Speedy Mashilo, as his deputy as well as safety and security MEC Pat Ngomana as provincial secretary. If Mabuza’s influence and power has not waned in the province, Ndlovu has an advantage over the others. He is contesting the job with Lucky Ndinisa (former provincial secretary), Peter Nyoni (cooperative governance and traditional affairs head of department), Fish Mahlalela (MP), David Dube (Mpumalanga legislature member), Mandla Ndlovu (current provincial secretary) and Charles Makola (former deputy chairperson). READ: Battle for Mpumalanga Ndlovu’s lobbyist, Smangaliso Khumalo, said that Mabuza’s vote of confidence was humbling. “We’re humbled but this puts pressure on us to work hard to convince the branches,” Khumalo said. “The four regional chairpersons have also endorsed Ndlovu before the deputy president did so,” Khumalo added.  Mandla Ndlovu Mabuza’s pronouncement has rattled other contenders. Ndinisa’s campaign spokesperson, Isaac Mahlangu, said that this looked like a national executive committee (NEC) decision because Mabuza was accompanied by another NEC member, David Mahlobo. “We’ll seek clarity from the NEC. We take a dim view of what they did…it’s undemocratic, un-ANC and unbecoming,” Mahlangu said. Nyoni said that it was unfortunate and unexpected of Mabuza to have endorsed his preferred successor. “It’s out of sync with the unity he has been talking about. In actual fact, he was telling branches who to elect. It’s unbecoming and undesirable,” he said. “We’ll have to look for individuals in the NEC to talk about us too,” Nyoni said.   