It used to be that Botox and chemical peels were procedures done by elderly women who wanted to slow down the aging process. But according to aesthetic medicine practitioners, the patients coming in for non-surgical procedures are getting younger, with more men booking appointments. Dr Carmen Wilsenach, a Johannesburg-based aesthetic practitioner specialising in dentistry, said: “More men are coming to us to enhance their looks. Most of them are aged between 28 and 40 and require procedures that reverse hair loss and thinning. “They are also starting to use Botox, especially around their eyes.” With the growth and reach of social media, Wilsenach said more young professionals were looking for procedures to boost their looks and confidence, but didn’t want the long downtime associated with going under the knife. “Some come in during their lunch break and are back at work in 30 minutes. “They see pictures of beautiful people on Instagram and want to have the same image. “I don’t always see that as unhealthy. Most patients just want to enhance their natural beauty and boost their confidence.” Dr Cobus van Niekerk, president of the Aesthetic and Anti-aging Medicine Society of South Africa, said there were several other reasons for undergoing the procedures. “Some do it to climb the corporate ladder or feel better about themselves. “Actors, on the other hand, want to look good on and off screen. “There are even studies that prove Botox alleviates depression because people usually feel better when their looks improve,” he said. Wilsenach said chemical peels and Botox remained the most popular procedures among women who don’t want to wear heavy make-up. “People are also starting to catch on to threads, which are suture-like materials placed under the skin for lifting. “They can last up to anywhere between seven months and a year. “Instead of doing a surgical face-lift most patients would rather have a thread lift, which also boosts collagen production”, she said. As the demand for non-invasive procedures increases, the practitioners agreed that South Africans would no longer have to travel abroad for Botox or microdermabrasions, as the skills of local doctors rivalled those of their international counterparts. “We have several training courses for doctors. The Foundation of Professional Development offers the advanced diploma of aesthetic medicine. “We also have several congresses in this field, which is growing in South Africa just as it is globally,” said Van Niekerk. The society has roughly 200 practitioners, and injectables can only be done by doctors or dentists who are registered with the Health Professions’ Council of SA. The industry, however, still struggles to overcome misconceptions about the affordability of the procedures. “Chemical peels cost as little as R500 and have almost no downtime. “A microdermabrasion – which exfoliates and removes the superficial layer of dry, dead skin cells – also goes for as little as R500. “The majority of doctors only want to enhance a patient’s beauty and the results look natural. “However, there are some patients who like the overdone look. In their case, it is important to exclude psychiatric conditions such as body dysmorphic disorder.” Dr Zak Schabort, founder of The Cosmetic and Dental Emporium, said South Africa had some of the best aesthetic doctors in the world and there was no reason it couldn’t be “the next Brazil” when it comes to medical tourism. He said: “I believe our results look natural and realistic, as local doctors use multiple aesthetic treatments and follow a more holistic approach.”