The Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa’s (Prasa) interim board failed to attend an emergency meeting with the transport portfolio committee Parliament on Tuesday morning. The committee meeting was meant to discuss the various challenges faced by the rail agency and receive a report from the Prasa board regarding the recent train accidents. The portfolio committee expressed its discontent with the Prasa board and accused it of avoiding accountability. “The service Prasa is rendering is meant to benefit the poor, and the cornerstone of that starts with being accountable to Parliament who appropriates funding to the entities and departments,” said committee chairperson Dikeledi Magadzi. Last Tuesday the Prasa board indicated to Parliament that they would not be able to attend on that day and when the meeting was postponed to this Tuesday, they did not show up. Magadzi said the central line in the Western Cape had not been working for five weeks and the committee had not received the 2016-2017 annual report from Prasa that was meant to be received in October last year. “We want to know what exactly is causing them to go into disarray,” said Magadzi. The committee said the acting chief executive for Prasa, Cromet Molepo, told the committee the invitation from Parliament only reached Prasa this Monday. “Allegiance and accountability should be to the millions of poor people who rely on trains for daily living and participation into the economy of this country. Prasa should respect Parliament,” she said Magadzi. The officials expected to attend this meeting is the Prasa board and the chief executive, the Western Cape regional manager and civil society coalition Unite Behind. Madoda Cuphe, a member of Unite Behind said they hoped to present a list of demands to Parliament to address alleged corruption, mismanagement, unsafe and unreliable train service. “We hope the portfolio committee will appoint a permanent board that will [effectively deal with these challenges],” said Cuphe. This meeting has been postponed to 2pm Tuesday afternoon to allow the board to travel to Cape Town. “We cannot continue to procrastinate [these issues],” said Magadzi.