Having gone off air for a month, with frustrated presenters later venting their anger over unpaid wages on live radio, North West FM is back on air, but the tension appears to have moved to the station’s boardroom. Just as things were getting back to normal, at least for listeners, a new shareholder – Motswako Media – has been accused of “hijacking” the troubled station before official recognition by the Independent Communications Authority of SA (Icasa). But Motswako said it stepped in only to “save the station from collapse”. The Johannesburg-based Motswako offers several services, from outdoor advertising to communications, with a footprint in several provinces. The company owns news agency News Note, which provides content for, among other products, the weekly newsletter Semphete for the North West government and Mogolodi for the ANC in the province. North West FM is still waiting for the outcome of its application for licence renewal with Icasa. There are concerns the continuing instability at the station could put its licence renewal chances at risk. The station’s first hurdle came last year when it started experiencing serious financial challenges. Some former employees told City Press that all the problems were as a result of a decline in advertising, including the provincial government’s “sudden” move to spend less money on advertising. The issue on the table, however, was to do with a complaint to Icasa by a North West FM board member, Kenny Setzin, who represents his company Direng Investment Holdings, which holds 26% of the station’s shares. Setzin has accused Motswako Media of “irregular board changes and circumvention of [the] Icasa regulation in respect of shareholder changes and management control”. He said the haste with which changes to the board of North West FM were made was irregular, resulting in Motswako taking control of the station, including, but not limited to, management control of news and current affairs and sales – with the collusion of nonexecutive directors of North West FM. This was not only putting the station’s licence renewal process at risk, but also creating serious reputational damage to the station and undermining the authority of Icasa,” Setzin said. Icasa spokesperson Paseka Maleka told City Press that the regulator had “received and published in the Government Gazette on June 8 an application for a transfer of ownership and control of the Individual Commercial Sound Broadcasting Service licence by North West FM. The application sought approval from Icasa to transfer ownership and control of North West FM’s individual commercial sound broadcasting service licence to Motswako Media. “This came after an engagement with North West FM when it was made clear that Motswako was not recognised by Icasa as a shareholder of North West FM until such time that regulatory processes had been duly followed in the form of applying for the transfer of ownership and control of the licencee,” Maleka said. Motswako said it had complied with application processes as confirmed by Icasa, but said it could not stand aside and watch as the station became a sinking ship when it could resuscitate its newly acquired investment. Company owner Tebogo Pooe said Motswako came in at a time when the station was almost on its knees and brought in dedicated effort and resources to save it. Pooe said his company met all requirements to acquire shares and was in the process of getting licence ownership through Icasa, but could not wait until that was achieved, given the problems at the station. “It would be very naive of us to hope to purchase a business that is clearly in danger of collapse, and stand by and just watch it happen,” Pooe said. He said a service-level agreement was signed with North West FM for Motswako to rescue the station from collapse. “Since signing the service-level agreement aimed at trading the station out of difficulty, Motswako Media has invested a considerable amount of money in paying workers’ salaries, which were outstanding for three months.” Pooe said that, by the time Motswako signed the agreement, the station was off the air. It owed money to Sentech, which offers signal distribution services to most of the country’s licenced broadcasters. North West FM also owed money to its landlord and the SA Music Rights Organisation. Meanwhile, Setzin told Icasa that the service-level agreement with Motswako “has been withheld from the board and only made available to the Motswako representative on the board”. Pooe said: “I am informed that Mr Kenny Setzin was invited to all board meetings and elected not to attend, and chose to attack the decision of the board he is part of through the media.”