He was told he would walk again, but three years later the department of higher education has allegedly not fulfilled its promise. In 2015, Lekae Combrinck-Nawa, who lost both legs in a car accident, was told he couldn’t register at the Tshwane University of Technology’s (TUT’s) art campus to study graphic design because the building wasn’t disabled-friendly. Although his application had been “unconditionally accepted”, Lekae’s father, Lance Nawa, had to carry him on his back on his first day. Lance, then a post-doctoral research fellow at TUT, raised the lack of disability-friendly infrastructure on campus, hoping it would be resolved. But acting vice-chancellor, Professor Lourens van Staden, told him Lekae’s acceptance was withdrawn because they didn’t have the money for renovations. In swooped former higher education minister Blade Nzimande, who pledged a grant towards upgraded facilities and money towards prosthetic legs for Lekae. Lance claims the university told him R1 million would be allocated to Lekae as a “gesture of goodwill and restoration of impaired dignity”. In a January 2015 letter City Press obtained, the university readmitted Lekae. Van Staden wrote: “You are hereby informed that the director-general of higher education and training, Mr [Gwebinkundla] Qonde, has made funding available for prosthesis for your son, which will enhance his mobility and enable him to move around with ease on campus.” But today the department denies making that promise and Lekae, now 23, remains wheelchair-bound. He was able to move around during the three years after his classes were moved to the ground floor and ramps were installed, which made things easier. Department spokesperson Madikwe Mabotha denied any agreement “for the department to fund the prosthetics”. “The department communicated to the university that the allocation made to TUT for infrastructure improvement for students and staff with disabilities was to ensure that people with disabilities have equal access to higher education,” he said. In 2015, Lekae received legs from a prosthetics company on trial on the strength of the department’s pledge, but these were taken away. A Human Rights Commission (HRC) probe into TUT’s admissions policy for disabled students found that Lance was ultimately responsible for securing prostheses for his son. TUT spokesperson Willa de Ruyter said it complied with all the HRC recommendations. Lekae said: “I was promised to be given something and I wasn’t. I learnt to walk in prosthetic legs and that was taken away.”