Racial stereotyping takes a toll on the physical, mental and emotional well being of everybody, even when we are not conscious of it as perpetrators and as recipients. Dudu Msomi, chief executive of Busara Leadership Partners told a recent GIBS forum that South Africa remains a divided society with dire economic consequences, and that ultimately, our organisations and the country bears the cost of not maximising diverse talents. Msomi appealed to the audience to choose the South Africa they want, to own their beliefs and for the white males and females in the room to stand up and be counted by leading transformation and not to leave it to black people who are in a disempowered position. “People have become so used to racism that we base our judgments on stereotypes rather than seeing people as individuals,” consultant Louise Paulsen added. Reforming racist attitudes Adriaan Groenewald, founder of The Leadership Platform and contributor on CliffCentral said the majority of white South Africans are recovering racists, who “need to realise that the propensity to racial prejudice is and will always be there.” As whites were “reared in an environment where racism was commonplace and accepted, it is ingrained in their belief system.” He said it was necessary for recovering racists to “realise, admit and actively work on their racism”, as in an open and interconnected society, there would be less and less place for racists to hide. Decades of institutionalised racism and propaganda had caused damage to both the proponents and recipients. “One portion of our population suffers from superiority complex, and the other portion from an inferiority complex. These opposites do not make for a successful nation or an environment of clear communication, trust and unity. We must see this suffering for what it is and deal with it in an appropriate manner.” Groenewald said South Africans had to work in order to evolve these weaknesses into strengths, and to “move forward as a nation in a vigilant and disciplined way. The journey of overcoming racism or inferiority is a personal one, but it prepares the way for building bridges, relationships, the economy and the country.” Managing director of Ethics Monitoring and Management Services, Cynthia Schoeman, said that when considering racism and racial stereotyping within an ethical framework, most people already know what is right and wrong: “Misconduct is very rarely the result of an absence of knowledge. We need to focus on trying to get people to make better choices.” She said misconduct could not be separated from South Africa’s history: “We are not sitting with a blank piece of paper, but rather with a deeply damaged and unjust past.” Schoeman called on corporates to initiate tough conversations within their organisations. “We cannot be naïve and pretend that the few cases of racism highlighted in the media are the exception. We cannot cross our fingers and hope it doesn’t happen to us.” “If we are going to start building a better society, there has to be conscious, deliberate and intentional focus on this,” she added. Corporate transformation Msomi argued that while business leaders claimed to be committed to the rule of law and the supremacy of the Constitution, the lack of transformation was proof that there is an unwillingness to address the injustices of the past even with legislation existing with implementation being subverted and sabotaged. Corporate South Africa was “becoming a very difficult and hostile environment for a lot of black professionals”, Paulsen added. President of the Black Management Forum, Mncane Mthunzi, said while South Africa had a very high unemployment rate, a “huge number of black graduates are not being absorbed, but are rather ignored”. “The governing party has sold us reformation. We have never experienced transformation.” He said it was racist and simply not true to say South Africa must grow its economy in order for transformation to happen. “The problems we have in South Africa are deep-seated. We must have confidence in black talent. Corporates will have black people dominance; it is only a matter of time.” Mthunzi criticised the slow pace of transformation: “The graduates of the Fees Must Fall movement will be in corporate corridors in the next three to five years and they will not tolerate the current pace of change. Failure to transform is going to create problems.” “How will there be change if we keep tip-toeing and not disrupting the status quo?” Msomi asked. She expressed disappointment in South African leaders who despite their positions and authority, avoid difficult conversations, taking the right decisions that result in true sustainable conditions rather than paying lip service and lacking strategic thinking to appreciate how their fear and myopic views limit all our progress.