There has been some progress in the water situation in Hammanskraal, says the City of Tshwane. The colour is returning to normal, there are no indications of cholera and residents are not at risk of any health complications. “It is of the utmost importance that the public satisfy themselves that there is no cholera in the Hammanskraal water. No hospitals in the area have treated any patients for cholera,” member of the mayoral committee for utility services in Tshwane, Darryl Moss, confirmed on Friday. Moss said the city had accepted that there were challenges in providing quality water in the area and he was working with the department of water and sanitation and the Human Rights Commission to resolve the matter. “It was also noted that even in the last few days an improvement in water colour had changed,” said Moss. This followed angry protests from the residents that the water provided in the area were not good enough and might cause illnesses. Read: Hammanskraal: We’ll protest until water promises are fulfilled Earlier this month, community member and secretary of the local branch of the South African National Civic Organisation Annah Mawela said they were planning to protest until they were taken seriously by the municipality. She confirmed on Friday that the water quality had improved but was not yet good for drinking. Apart from having to buy drinking water, Mawela said previously that the residents felt as though they were being ignored by the government. She said of the nine wards in Hammanskraal, only one had clean water. This had been going on for a long time, and the government had made promises, but hadn’t delivered. In desperation, residents shut down the area by burning tyres and closing all roads saying that they had enough of empty promises. Moss added that: “The City would like to apologise to the residents of Hammanskraal for the panic that was caused in the past weeks.” He said the city would continue to monitor all the water treatment plants, reservoirs and distribution networks for compliance with drinking water standards. Mawela said that even though the City had organised trucks to supply Hammanskraal with water, the community was not entirely happy about that because they had been outsourced. “The trucks are going to cause a problem. They are from Mpumalanga, our people were not given a chance in this project. The City should have at least taken 15 trucks from Hammanskraal out the 25 that are supplying water,” said Mawela. “Our people are unemployed, and the city knows that. They are solving a problem with a problem and we are not happy about that.” During his last visit in the area, Tshwane Mayor Solly Msimanga said that the City had advertised a tender to augment the Rooiwal Water Treatment Plant. “We will ensure that supply chain management processes are expedited as far as humanly and legally possible to ensure that the contractor is on the ground very quickly,” said Msimanga.