Former US President Barack Obama said on Tuesday the world should resist cynicism over the rise of strongmen in an apparent reference to populist leaders who hold power in several countries. “Just as people spoke about the triumph of democracy in the 90s, people now are talking about the triumph of tribalism and the strong man. But we need to resist that cynicism,” Obama said in a speech to mark the 100th anniversary of the birth of Nelson Mandela.  There were about 16 000 people at Wanderers Stadium for the event.  Obama said that much progress had been made over the years but that the international world order had fallen short on its promises and it had become evident that more needed to be done.  “It is because of the failure of the world order that we see the whole world trying to go back to the old more brutal way of doing business ... The previous structures of injustice and exploitation never really went away,” he said.  Without mentioning current US president Donald Trump, Obama said these were “strange and uncertain times”. “Basic truths do not change,” Obama said.  Meanwhile, in London, Prince Harry and his wife Meghan visited an exhibition marking 100 years since Mandela’s birth. The duke and duchess of Sussex met friends and family of the anti-apartheid campaigner who died in 2013, including his grand-daughter Zamaswazi Dlamini-Mandela.  They also spoke to 92-year-old Andrew Mlangeni, who spent nearly three decades in Robben Island prison with Mandela.  Prince Harry visited Mandela’s cell on the island during a 2015 trip to South Africa. The exhibition has been shown in various forms around the world, including six weeks at the Paris Town Hall in 2013.  Sello Hatang, chief executive of the Nelson Mandela Foundation, said: “London was both South Africa’s colonial metropole and the headquarters of the international anti-apartheid struggle. It was also the venue for some of Nelson Mandela’s most inspiring speeches.” The exhibition at London’s Southbank Centre is free to the public and runs until August 19. – Reuters 