It was a quick but busy court appearance for Duduzane Zuma, who appeared in court on Monday for corruption charges. The son of former President Zuma faced a throng of journalists as he walked in and out of the Specialised Commercial Crime Court in Johannesburg, shackled and escorted by law enforcement officers. He was granted bail of R100 000 and was ordered to hand over his passport. National Prosecuting Authority spokesperson, Phindi Louw Mjonondwane confirmed that Duduzane appeared in court on charges of corruption. “This morning at around 9am Duduzane Zuma was in court facing charges of corruption and he was granted bail of R100 000. One of the conditions of his bail was that he is to hand in his passport to the investigating officer,” she said. Duduzane was charged with corruption for the alleged role he played in an attempt to bribe deputy finance minister, Mcebisi Jonas, at the Guptas’ Saxonwold home in 2015. It has been reported that at a meeting with Duduzane, businessman Fana Hlongwane and one of the Gupta brothers, Ajay Gupta, Jonas was allegedly offered the position of finance minister as well as a bribe of R600 million. Jonas revealed how he was offered a bribe to take the job of finance minister. It is alleged that Duduzane was a party to the crime because he was present when the offer was made to Jonas by Gupta. A few Duduzane supporters were at loggerheads with journalists as they attempted to prevent pictures of Duduzane from being taken outside the courthouse, calling them sellouts, following the conclusion of the hearing. “You are just agents of white monopoly capital, how can a group of you be here for one black man,” they shouted. On Sunday, City Press reported that, last week Duduzane travelled back to South Africa from Dubai with his lawyer Rudi Krause. On his arrival at OR Tambo International Airport, Duduzane was briefly detained there, as his passport was picked up by the immigration officer’s system after it was placed on the Hawk’s domestic watch list. The Hawks were immediately notified of his arrival and officers were sent to the airport where they produced a copy of the warrant of arrest for corruption. Duduzane’s case has been suspended to January 24 2019.