Despite assurances from the City of Tshwane that the water in Hammanskraal is safe to drink, the community will continue to protest until they see that something is being done about the situation. Although Tshwane mayor Solly Msimanga was set to meet with the Hammanskraal Residents Forum on Friday, residents were determined to keep up the pressure until action was taken. Residents have shut down Hammanskraal on numerous occasions in the past few weeks. The situation escalates daily – tyres have been burnt, roads have been barricaded and the majority of workers have had to take days off work due to the unrest. They are protesting over the standard of water in the area. The residents believe that the water is contaminated, and might cause cholera and other health complications. Public relations officer for the Jubilee Hospital in Hammanskraal, Moses Tlamama, said that the hospital had not admitted anyone who was sick because of the water. He assured City Press that even though the roads that led in and out of the hospital had been barricaded, things were normal. “The water was tested and no traces of cholera have been found. It has been work as usual – only those with cars can’t get in or out. Community members could walk and come to the hospital,” said Tlamama. Community member and secretary of the local branch of the South African National Civic Organisation Annah Mawela said they were planning to protest until they were taken seriously by the municipality. “We are concerned about the water. Out of nine wards in Hammanskraal, only one has clean water. This has been going on for a very long time. We sent proposals to the government, but it has been promises after promises,” she said. “We have to buy water; we cannot use the water from the tap for cooking and drinking. We wish for recognition. We feel that the government is distant from us.” Member of the Mayoral Committee (MMC) for utility services in Tshwane, Darryl Moss, faced acts of violence during his attempts to try and engage with the residents. “In his attempt to engage with the residents and address their plight, the MMC was attacked and held hostage. The assault happened as community members tried to engage with the MMC on issues with their water supply,” said Msimanga. Mawela said that although Moss visited the area and said he was going to get back to them about the water crisis, “the process is just too slow”. Speaking on behalf of the police in Hammanskraal, Sarah Lesabane said that the public order policing unit was closely monitoring the situation. No arrests had been made in connection with the disruptions and violence. “This DA-led administration is committed to serving residents of Hammanskraal, and Tshwane at large, as best we can despite the seemingly coordinated and ongoing attempts to prevent our doing so. We want to ensure the people of Hammanskraal that we are not deterred in our efforts to serve them,” said Msimanga.