The national police commissioner has been asked to step in after an attempted land grab on a mineral rich farm in Dundee in KwaZulu-Natal, amid claims that the perpetrators enjoyed police protection and that the main state witness in a corruption case against a local senior police officer had vanished. Prominent lawyers Victor Nkwashu Attorneys Inc wrote to the head of police, General Khehla Sitole, stating that attempts to illegally invade the Hazeldene coal mining farm were also meant to intimidate state witnesses in the corruption case against the senior police officer. A copy of the letter bears Sithole’s office stamp, dated June 29 2018. Victor Nkhwashu’s client, the Transasia coal mining company, was the complainant in a 2016 corruption case involving a branch commander of the Dundee detective services, which the Hawk’s anti-corruption unit in Gauteng was investigating. The residents of Hazeldene have held the title deed under the Phezukomkhono Communal Property Association since 2006. On May 11 a group of 20 people arrived with corrugated iron and poles, claiming that they had permission from the land affairs department to occupy the property.  An unnamed government official – who had been fingered as the facilitator of the alleged invasion – has since denied the claims as “a lie”, according to government insiders. A land grab case was opened with the Dundee police station against the leader of the invading group – a woman only named as Mrs Khoza or “MaMtshali”. Victor Nkhwashu said Mrs Khoza, “identified as the same lady who accompanied the accused (the branch commander)” when he was entrapped by the Hawks in October 2016, was yet to be arrested. City Press had reported on the arrest in 2016. Hawks spokesperson, Captain Ndivhuwo Mulamu, had said that Lieutenant-Colonel Wilfred Mtshali had allegedly demanded a R10 000 bribe from Transasia chief executive Luda Roytblat in order for him to help her with the investigation of several cases that she had opened at the Dundee Police Station earlier that year. Victor Nkhwashu said in the letter to Sitole that one of the main state witnesses, Stan Richard Sithole, worked and resided on the Hazeldene farm that Mrs Khoza and her group allegedly tried to occupy. “These workers, including the state witness, were threatened with violence and death if they did not leave,” he said, adding that “as a consequence hereof the main state witness (Sithole) disappeared and his mobile phones were switched off”.  “What was disconcerting was that he didn’t take his personal belongings and his motor vehicle and/or keys,” said Victor Nkhwashu. As a result of the alleged intimidation the lawyers said that Transasia “is likely not to get justice against the accused”. “It is puzzling that a senior police officer who is faced with such serious allegations and a possibility of direct imprisonment is left to run a detective unit,” he said, referring to claims that Mtshali was back at work after a suspension. “The complainant is feeling very frustrated, helpless and has lost all faith and confidence in the image of the South African Police Services in that the accused person in the above case is tasked, among others, with a duty to allocate, monitor and supervise case dockets for investigations [including] wherein his friends and cohorts are suspects”. According to Victor Nkhwashu’s letter, the Dundee station commander later confirmed to a provincial team visiting the area following Transasia’s complaint that they knew where Sithole was and that he was safe. Sithole also “resurfaced and made contact” with Tranasia confirming that he was “alive and well”. However, there were things he wanted to discuss related to corruption investigations in Dundee before coming back to work. Police insiders have told City Press that the case against Mrs Khoza had been miraculously closed but was since reopened and transferred to nearby Glenko police station for an independent investigation. Questions sent to Dundee police station on the status of the case had not been answered. In 1999 Sidney Shongwe (39) arrived at Hazeldene farm to work for Viljoen Broers Boerdery under livestock farmer, Johan Viljoen and partners. There he found the Buthelezi brothers, Protus, Andreas and Veli, who had been living on the property for many years. Sfiso Buthelezi, the son of Andreas (59), told City Press that both he and his father were born on the farm. In 2006 Viljoen sold the land to the government, which transferred ownership to the Buthelezi brothers and their families under Phezukomkhono. Nine years later Phezukomkhono and the then minister of land affairs, Gugile Nkwinti, signed an agreement with Transasia mining for coal prospecting rights on the farm. Transasia has since started operations on the property and built houses for the beneficiaries in line with the service level agreement.  Shongwe told City Press that he first met Mrs Khoza in 2016 during a meeting in Butterfield, where she made claims that the portion of land on Hazeldene under Phezukomkhono was actually a part of the neighbouring farm called Sunshine and therefore belonged to that community. “But she disappeared for a very long time only to resurface in May, coming with a group of people in the property and wanting to build on the land,” says Shongwe, who lives with his family of four on the land. Protus has since died, leaving Andreas with six other family members, and Veli with a family of five. Shongwe says that after several attempts to get help from the police but not having any luck, seven police vans arrived on the scene to assist them. Phezukomkhono produced a copy of its title deed but the other group did not have any proof. Shongwe said the local land affairs office in Dundee also confirmed that the Phezukomkhono group had a legal right to occupy the property. Questions sent to the department were not answered.    