Attempted murder has been added to the charge sheet of former ANC staffer, Errol Present. He was initially arrested in connection with three “heinous” cash-in-transit heists to the tune of R250 000. State prosecutor Paseka Timeli revealed during the accused’s bail hearing that all four accused now faced an additional charge of attempted murder after a GS guard was shot and critically wounded during an alleged heist in Dobsonville, Soweto. Present and three accomplices – Zakhele Zondo, Itumeleng Manama and Bheki Biyela – were arrested on July 6 and 7 in connection with a heist outside a Capitec Bank in Elias Motsoaledi Road in Soweto. They were charged with robbery with aggravated circumstances and being in possession of hijacked vehicles. Four hijacked vehicles were allegedly recovered in the possession of the four accused; two of the vehicles were apparently linked to the heist outside the Capitec Bank and two other heists in the North West province. During Tuesday’s bail application Timeli said the state would oppose bail as the accused faced schedule six offences “and would have to prove exceptional circumstances as to why they should be granted bail”. The state also opposed disclosing the contents of the docket arguing that it was “in order to protect its witnesses”. The defence team, however, requested that contents of the dockets be disclosed in order for the accused’s lawyers to properly prepare for their clients’ bail application. The defence lawyers also asked for the amended charge sheet containing the additional charges. “The accused needs to prepare his defence properly and thoroughly. I submit, if that is not the case, that the accused’s right to a fair trial is infringed [upon] in terms of the Bill of Rights,” said advocate Nthabiseng Mahomane, representing Manama. During the proceedings Magistrate John Baloyi ruled that the media not show the accused’s faces because another identification parade was still to be conducted. Ben Modumaela, representing Present, said he would object to his client being subjected to yet another identity parade and argued that the former ANC staffer’s face had already been plastered across various media publications as well as social media sites. According to Modumaela, four witnesses had already been called to the parade and had not identified his client. Modumaela also added that Present was arrested while walking, he was bewildered as to how his client could be charged with the possession of suspected stolen vehicles. Police Minister Bheki Cele confirmed after Present’s arrest that “the suspect [Present] arrested for his involvement in a cash heist syndicate was an employee of the ANC, involved in the organising committee of the party, based at Luthuli House”. Cele also revealed that the recent allegations against Present were not his first brush with the law: “This is his third cash heist, two [other heists were in the] North West plus this one.” City Press also revealed that the former ANC official was linked to a whole host of other charges against him – having been arrested at least eight times. Information on the police criminal administration system (CAS) revealed that Present was arrested for violent crimes ranging from murder and attempted murder to armed robbery. • Robbery-in-transit in July this year; • Intimidation in February this year; • Possession of an unlicensed firearm in November last year; • Armed robbery in June last year; • Malicious damage to property in February last year; • Murder in November 2016; • Reckless and negligent driving in May 2015; and • Attempted murder in July 2013.  The murder case against Present was closed in September last year after the regional court in Roodepoort found him not guilty. Court adjourned on Tuesday without a ruling on the bail application.   