Nomthandazo Mkhize says she usually buys groceries in bulk because it works out cheaper. But at the end of last month, she couldn’t afford to because it was simply too expensive. The music teacher from Johannesburg yearns for the days between 2008 and 2010, when she was in a more “comfortable” and “much, much better” financial position. Mkhize says she is finding it very difficult to survive during the current tough economic times. This is despite having two incomes to support her household of six, which includes her family’s domestic worker. “It’s just too expensive to survive. Driving is also very expensive,” she says. The Mkhize family has two cars – “a small one and a big one” – but now they only use the small one because it is more fuel-efficient. As a musician, she says, she has tried to look for extra jobs and gigs, even for one night only. These make a difference. But those who employ her to perform at concerts are also finding it tough going because audiences are finding the concerts too expensive to attend. “As a family, we have cut out the expense of going out because we just can’t afford it,” she says. Even buying takeaway meals every other Friday is no longer an option. “Eating out is just too expensive now.” Mkhize recalls how nervous she felt when the 1% increase in VAT was announced. Little did she know how much it would affect her family. She says immediately after the increase came into effect in April, she noticed how she spent the same amount of money, but was able to buy fewer groceries. “We can really feel it now. Even something as simple as toilet paper had to be changed. Why use double ply when cheaper single ply can do?” she asks. If the food is finished, it is finished About two months ago, Thembi Mokoena (56) started feeling the pinch and has had to scale down when buying monthly groceries. As a result of the 1% VAT increase and two petrol price increases this year, Mokoena has had to cut back on food rather than her family’s non-negotiable needs, such as her transport money to work and electricity. Mokoena, from Tekwane South, a township 30km east of Mbombela, supports her six grandchildren and is her household’s sole breadwinner. She works as a teacher in Pienaar, and used to spend R1 000 a month on taxis. Now she has to spend R100 more. Transport costs will also increase for two of her grandchildren – a 10-year-old and a 13-year-old – who attend a private school in Mbombela. Until now, Mokoena has been paying R1 800 a month for both to travel to school. She expects this to rise by R200 to R300 when the taxi association increases prices. All these costs are paid for with her R9 000 monthly salary. The quantities of food she buys have decreased, and she has done away with some items to stick to her R3 500-a-month grocery budget. “I can no longer buy big. I used to buy 10kg sugar, now I buy 5kg. I have cut oats and cornflakes from the grocery list. Whatever is finished before the end of the month is not replaced. It is finished until the next grocery purchase,” Mokoena said. Saving, she said, is no longer possible. Mokoena intends starting a crèche to supplement her salary: “As it is, I’m not able to save at all. I need that extra income to get by.” TALK TO US When was the last time you had some disposable income you could use to enjoy life or buy a spoil? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword CASH and tell us what you think. Include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50