They handed over houses, read to learners, handed over blankets and one was even even challenged to spend 67 minutes in a shack – it was once again a busy day for South Africa’s political leaders as they commemorated Nelson Mandela International Day. This year was particularly significant as it marked 100 years since former president Mandela’s birth. At Madiba’s home in Mvezo in the Eastern Cape, President Cyril Ramaphosa, former presidents, and traditional leaders presented the centennial celebrations of Mandela together with the Royal House of Mandela. They handed over blankets to the elderly and bicycles to learners, officially opened a local clinic and planted trees. Accompanying Ramaphosa were former presidents Kgalema Motlanthe and Jacob Zuma. Zuma said Madiba was everything “we should all aspire to be”. “President Mandela was a dignified man who never sacrificed principle at the altar of political convenience,” he said. “As we analyse his life we realise that it was essentially driven by principle, not by slogan, not by cheap words or cheap actions. And this he did regardless of the pressure that was placed on him or the hardships that he had to endure,” Ramaphosa said. Meanwhile, Deputy President David Mabuza was in Mpumalanga to hand over newly built houses to seven families in the community of Amsterdam as part of an ongoing project with government and the private sector. “Through our words and deeds, we will continue working towards a South Africa of his dreams. This is a society where we must achieve radical transformation that will address unemployment, poverty and inequality that continue to plague our country,” said Mabuza. Democratic Alliance leader Mmusi Maimane was in Limpopo reading to learners at Lotanang Primary School in Polokwane. “If Mandela Day should remind us of one thing, it is how far we have fallen short in preparing our children for the future. We all know Mandela’s quote where he said ‘education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world’,” said Maimane. Former DA leader Helen Zille was challenged by activists to spend her 67 minutes in a shack. GroundUp reported that the Housing Assembly Youth Collective built a shack in the early hours of Wednesday morning outside the residence of the Western Cape premier and challenged her to spend 67 minutes in it. In a statement later in the day, Zille said she would participate at the LEAP Science and Maths Schools’ Mandela Day programme at the Canal Walk Shopping Centre. The Economic Freedom Fighters leaders spent their time at the public hearings on the amendment of the Constitution for expropriation of land without compensation. In a statement the party said it was happy Mandela Day coincided with the public hearings on the amendments of section 25 of the Constitution. Parliament also released a statement in honour of Madiba. “Parliament reaffirms its determination to continue building an activist people’s Parliament, responsive to the needs of the people and driven by the ideal of a better life for all. Through its constitutional function, Parliament shall continue to strive for the realisation of the ideals, values and freedoms, which Madiba championed,” read the statement.