The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa has accused Mercedes-Benz South Africa (MBSA) of lying and going back on an agreement to absorb contract workers as full-time workers after 12 months of employment. “We have a plant agreement with MBSA which states that contract workers must be absorbed as full-time workers after their 12-month contract comes to an end. MBSA informed 19 contract workers last Friday that their contracts will be terminated on the 4th of July,” Numsa said on Wednesday. “These workers are in their 11th month of their contracts. MBSA is terminating their contracts in direct contravention of the plant agreement we signed with them,” added the union. Last week MBSA announced that the company would make an investment of R10 billion into the South African economy, with the intention of expanding the capacity of its East London manufacturing plant and therefore creating more jobs. The announcement was greeted with much fanfare, with President Cyril Ramaphosa going to East London to attend the event, saying the investment would help improve the lives of South Africans. Numsa said by terminating the contracts of the 19 employees, MBSA was being hypocritical, especially after it claimed that the investment would result in at least 800 direct jobs being created. “MBSA exploited these workers for their labour and has now reneged on its promise to hire them permanently – shame on them,” said the union. Numsa’s acting national spokesperson, Phakamile Hlubi-Majola, said MBSA violated the terms of the agreement with Numsa. “Those employees should not have been let go. They had a 12-month contract with Mercedes Benz and in the 11th month they were told they were being let go,” she said. Thato Mntambo, the corporate communications manager at MBSA, said the terms of the company’s agreement with Numsa stipulated that if employees on fixed-term contracts were employed for 12 months or more, they were automatically absorbed on a permanent basis. “The 19 employees referred to by Numsa were fixed term contractors on an 11-month contract. Their contracts expired on July 4 2018 and they were reminded of this ahead of the date of expiry in the spirit of the current plant collective agreement, Siyaphambili,” she said. Numsa Eastern Cape regional secretary, Mziyanda Twani, said the employees had a 12-month contract with MBSA. “On the fourth of next month the employees would have been at the plant for 12 months and MBSA would have had to employ them permanently, as per our agreement,” he said. According to Numsa, the management of the plant has offered to extend the contracts of the 19 employees by three months only, but still refused to guarantee them permanent employment thereafter. Twani said Numsa could not accept the second agreement. “If the company wants to approach the individuals, it is their prerogative. We as Numsa want to reserve our rights in terms of the current agreement,” he said. “Our plan is, if we feel that management violated the agreement, we have the option to use section 200 of the Labour Relations Act to pursue a legal battle with MBSA for violating the current agreement.” According to section 200, a registered trade union or registered employers’ organisation may act in its own interest, on behalf of or in the interest of any of its members, in any dispute to which any of its members is a party. The department of labour said that this is a matter between Numsa and the company, and if Numsa believe there is a collective agreement then they can approach the CCMA to enforce it.