Young people need three things to be successful – education, the right role models and to support others. “If you have that in your life, you will never go wrong.” These are the words of physics guru Dr Xolani Humphrey Mkhwanazi, who is also an internationally experienced business leader with technical experience in the energy, mining and public sector. The National Science and Technology Forum recently bestowed a special Ukhozi Award on Dr Mkhwanazi for his contribution to the society and the fields of science and technology. But getting to the top of his game didn’t come easily. His parents separated when he was young and he was raised by his mother who was a nurse. She moved her young family to Swaziland, where Mkhwanazi completed his schooling – at Salesian High School in Manzini – before moving on to study maths and physics at the universities of Botswana and Swaziland. He was 21 when his mother died. “The passing of my mother affected me so badly. I was depressed for years but I told myself I need to push and make her proud.” Mkhwanazi began his career as a lecturer at the University of Swaziland in physics in 1978, and soon became involved in politics. He joined Umkhonto weSizwe, the armed wing of the African National Congress, but was targeted by the apartheid government and fled to the United Kingdom. “We had to leave the country so we could survive. I came back to the country only when it was safe and we were allowed to vote. I could not come anytime I wanted because it was dangerous.” Mkhwanazi studied his master’s and doctorate degrees in applied physics at the University of Lancaster. In 1984, he was appointed head of the physics department but then moved to Perth, Australia, where he spent four years working as a physics researcher and consultant before returning to South Africa in December 1992. “When I came back to the country in 1992, I did not want to be part of a political party. I joined the ANC back then because I wanted to end the apartheid system. I went on to find a job like an ordinary person. With my qualifications, skills and connections I got a job as a senior scientist at Atomic Energy Corporation.” Mkhwanazi believed that it was not only important to make sure that young people were encouraged and motivated to pursue a career in maths and science, but also to motivate them to get educated because education is a weapon for ordinary people to get out of the cycle of poverty. “I am a strong believer of uplifting young people in the maths and science spectrum. Knowing my background and having support and encouragement from my mother, I believe it is my duty to play a role in assisting those who are in need hence my philosophy is ‘thrive by supporting others,’” he said. South African learners’ performance in maths and science has been rather dismal. The latest Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study, for 2015, reported that, statistically, the mathematical achievement for South Africa’s Grade 5 mathematics learners was 45th out of 48 countries. “The reason why the statistics for maths are so low is because teachers lack motivation. There is not enough [encouragement for learners to take] the subjects [maths and science] and again teachers need to motivate the children to start being positive about it,” he said. Mkhwanazi has made it his mission to motivate young people to pursue a career in maths and science. “I show them the possibilities of studying,” he said. He was also planning to launch a maths and science foundation that would focus on grooming young people in the fields of maths, science and engineering. “Winning this award means so much to me. I was truly honoured. I felt really special. I am grateful and humbled that my work in the science and technology fields is being recognised,” he said. Jansie Niehaus, executive director of the forum, said is wasn’t difficult to choose Mkhwanazi for the award because he had contributed so much to the forum and the science, engineering and technology community. “Dr Mkhwanazi has been a key contributor since the beginning of the forum. He deserves the award for his enormous contribution to the organisation,” said Niehaus. Much of his success, said Mkhwanazi, was due to the investments from his role models. “One of my role models is my former maths teacher, Josiah Ramakgopa. That man moulded me, he guided me, and he made me fall in love with maths and science – hence my passion for it. I also look up to Dr Great Makhaya, who was one of the few black physicists back then.” “The three ingredients that have made me to be this successful are education, supporting others and having correct role models. If you have that in your life, you will never go wrong”, said Mkhwanazi.