Police are investigating a case of kidnapping and hijacking after Passenger Rail Agency of SA (Prasa) interim board chairperson Khanyisile Kweyama was on Thursday pepper sprayed and bundled into the boot of her car. She was driven for three hours before being dumped with the car in Katlehong and left unharmed. Kweyama is also chairperson of the Brand SA board, and sits on the Telkom and SABC boards. She was appointed to the Prasa board almost three months ago and is the second-highest ranking official of Prasa to be hijacked within that period. Acting chief executive at the time Lindikhaya Zide was also hijacked and thrown into the boot of his car. The hijacking took place near her home in Houghton Estate while she drove back from a meeting at the SABC in Auckland Park. Kweyama’s spokesperson, Mathatha Tsedu, said: “As she entered Houghton, a BMW sedan bumped her twice from behind. When she got out to inspect she was pepper sprayed and bundled into the boot of her car by two hijackers. “They drove around with her for hours before ditching the car with her in the back, in Katlehong near the Prasa station of Kwesine.” The suspects made off with her handbag, cellphone and two iPads belonging to the SABC and Brand SA, respectively. Kweyama said: “The men told me they only needed money and tried to withdraw money from my card without success, and then simply abandoned me locked in the car. “For people who spent three hours with me bemoaning their poverty and emphasising their need for money, it is strange that they eventually just left without that money.” She is grateful to the residents of Katlehong, who helped her by ensuring her safety and reunited with her family after the ordeal. Prasa has been the subject of widespread corruption through a number of tenders, and the new board has been investigating and reversing some of the deals. This is known to have ruffled the feathers of a number of vested interests. Police spokesperson Colonel Noxolo Kweza said: “I can confirm that we are investigating a case of kidnapping and hijacking.”