Labour brokers claim the Constitutional Court’s long-awaited ruling on the so-called “deeming provision” is practically meaningless and won’t change a thing. This is despite the same industry having told the court last year that making the ruling it ultimately made would be tantamount to banning labour brokers. The court this week ruled in favour of the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) on the controversial provision introduced into the labour Relations Act in 2014, which became effective on January 1 2015. It reads that a labour broker worker earning less than R205 000 a year is deemed to be the employee of the client company they work at after three months. There are many caveats and workers on genuinely temporary jobs like construction projects are excluded, but the provision covers a large part of the labour brokering industry which is estimated to place at least 600 000 workers in South Africa at any given time. The case turned on whether this “deeming” process leads to a so-called dual-employer or sole-employer situation. All but one of the justices agreed on the sole-employer interpretation, meaning the labour broker stops being the legal employer and all labour rights can be demanded of the client instead. That includes unionisation rights, the right to strike and bargain and any other right the Labour Relations Act gives a worker. An attorney for the labour brokers’ industry body Capes, Craig Kirshmann, claims the judgment will have no practical effect at all. “We are disappointed to lose the direct relationship,” he told City Press. At the same time, all labour brokers will have to do it maintain their relationship with the client and worker through contract, he said. Labour brokers are still going to be involved in all human resources processes, he said. “Unions expected us to fall out of the picture entirely. That’s completely wrong,” he said. “Nothing happens, it is just a legal fiction.” According to Kirshmann labour brokers have prepared for this eventuality by drafting their agreements with clients to cover “both scenarios”. In a note on the judgment, Cliffe Dekker Hofmeyr directors Hugo Pienaar and Jose Jorge and associates Steven Adams and Nonkululeko Sunduza said the labour broker would essentially become a “pay roll administrator”. Numsa greeted the ruling as a “major victory for casual and temporary workers who are abused by labour brokers”. “We view this as the first step in ending the labour brokering system in South Africa ... We hope this decision will be the death knell of the entire industry and, as Numsa, we will continue to fight for a total ban on Labour brokers,” the union said. Other unions under the umbrella of the South Africa Federation of Trade Unions also put out euphoric statements. “This ruling frees workers from slavery and exploitation under Labour brokers,” said the National Union of Public Service and Allied Workers. On the coalface of the labour broker wars the response was more muted. The Casual Workers Advice Office, a small non-governmental organisation that had been representing hundreds of labour broker workers fighting for “deeming” rights at several large client companies, was admitted as a friend to the court in the case. The office’s Ronald Wesso told City Press that losing the case would have been a disaster, but that winning it “doesn’t resolve the problem” either. “We know what the obstacles are that employers use and the ruling removes a big one. But the other ones are still there. They throw the book and the bookcase at you. “The full meaning of the ruling depends on the organisational effort the goes with it. Maybe now the mainstream labour movement will devote real resources to it,” he said. The office was representing labour broker workers who were fired, allegedly for insisting on their deeming rights at companies including Simba and Kellogg’s.