The high rate of HIV infections in South Africa has left Health Minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi “scared”. Motsoaledi was addressing a discussion on leadership for HIV primary prevention on Monday, at the 22nd International Aids Conference, which is taking place in Amsterdam. During his address, he spoke about the remarkable strides which have been made in the country’s fight against the Aids pandemic – an estimated 7.9 million people are HIV positive. Motsoaledi highlighted the most vulnerable group within the South African population: girls between the ages of 15 and 24. According to the Health Science Research Council’s national HIV prevalence, incidence, behaviour and communication survey, which was released last week, this group had the highest incidence rate. “We are still scared, very scared, when we compare these figures. There are two main challenges we are faced with in South Africa,” Motsoaledi said, after the survey also showed that there was a 44% reduction in the infection rate in South Africa. Motsoaledi explained the first challenge was that the group constituted 80% of all new infections. This needed to be addressed and reduced. He also explained the rollout of the She Conquers campaign. The campaign, which was launched in 2016 by then deputy president Cyril Ramaphosa, sought to alleviate social ills that affected young adolescent girls – such as teenage pregnancy and gender-based violence. He said one of the main challenges was to address the men in the country and the relationship that young girls had with them – which was “to lead them to socioeconomic opportunities, so as to reduce their dependence on the man, who impregnated and infected them. "They are called blessers, these colourful but ugly names,” he told the delegates. Deputy President David Mabuza was meant to lead the South African delegation to Amsterdam, but had seconded Motsoaledi to the role after joining President Cyril Ramaphosa at the 10th annual Brics summit, currently taking place in Johannesburg. The conference was hosting about 18 000 delegates from across the world, which included a range of activists, researchers and government representatives. Charlize Theron, the South African born Hollywood actress who has been a fierce Aids campaigner since 2007, when she formed the Charlize Theron Africa Outreach Project, was also in attendance. On Tuesday, she spoke passionately about the importance of the youth getting involved and having their voices heard at the conference. One of the ground-breaking research papers to be presented at the conference was the Partner study into HIV transmission between partners who were HIV positive and partners who were not. It produced uplifting results. According to the study, which included 783 gay couples, there were zero transmissions between HIV-positive and HIV-negative partners, even when there was sex without the use of a condom. This second phase of the study followed the first phase, which examined 888 mostly straight couples. While the HIV-positive partner was on ARVs, the HIV negative partner was on Pre-exposure prophylaxis or PrEP, a pill that was taken once a day in order to prevent infection. The opening night of the conference did not go off smoothly. A group of female activists called for the resignation of UNAids director Michel Sidibe, who was accused of interfering with a investigation into former United Nations assistant secretary, Liuz Lourez, who accused of sexual assault in 2015. Retweeted Thabile Stella Mbhele (@ThabileStella):A group of women have demonstrated at the International AIDS Conference, again calling on UNAIDS Director Michel Sidibe to step down after the sexual abuse scandal at UNAIDS #SABCNews #AIDS2018 pic.twitter.com/Fbw7zHL3zV Lourez was accused by Martina Brostrom, UNAids external relations officer, of assaulting her in an elevator at the Dusit Tham hotel in Bangkok on May 8 2015. In May, Sidibe had visited South Africa during a five-day visit to southern African countries when civil society groups Section 27, Sonke Gender Justice and the Treatment Action Campaign called for an inquiry into Sidibe’s handling of the assault claims. The conference continues until Friday.