The South African Federation of Trade Unions (Saftu) is hellbent on advancing socialism as it pushes back against capitalism. At its two-day Working Class Summit 2018 held at the University of Johannesburg’s Soweto campus, the federation brought labour unions, civil rights organisations and activists under one umbrella. Mac Chavalala, president of Saftu, says the summit seeks to unite unions and people who choose to fight against capitalism and other social ills in society. “We are gathered here to coordinate a response to the deepening crisis of capitalism in our society. This summit is about the unity of working-class formations.” The only way out of this capitalism crisis, he says, is a mass movement of the working class, guided by Marxist-Leninist ideology. Capitalism is a system caused by the African National Congress government. “The capitalist crisis has forced you to come and sit here in this very cold hall. This is the price you have to pay as the working class,” said Chavala to summit supporters who came in numbers. The convention is an opportunity for members of the working class and civil society to break the mould on issues affecting them. Seven commissions were created to tackle burning issues including the expropriation of land without compensation, free decolonised quality public education, decent affordable housing and service delivery as well as improving the informal economy. Zwelinzima Vavi, general secretary of Saftu, criticised the media for its absence at the summit. “The media is ignoring us. They are gone to cover ‘thuma mina’, but we’re here to reclaim South Africa,” he said. The recent VAT increase to 15% was raised, stoking the ire of workers who bear the brunt of its introduction. Chavalala says VAT was increased to punish poor people “to fix a crisis they didn’t create”. In addition, he says, the working class feels the pinch of the continuous fuel hikes. “The ANC government is so arrogant. Almost every day there are protests in South Africa. In this country you will not be heard unless you take to the streets,” he said. The summit will continue tomorrow with feedback session on what was discussed at the various commissions.