A once-in-a-lifetime spectacle will take place this evening as the longest lunar eclipse of the 21st century will be visible from the southern tip of Africa – and Johannesburg will have the best seat in the world. Well “almost” once in a lifetime, says chairperson of the Astronomical Society of Southern Africa Johannesburg Centre, Jerome Jooste, before adding with a hearty laugh “well, only because we don’t know how long we will live too”. Start time: 21:30 End time: 23:13 *This is the total eclipse period. You would start seeing the earth’s umbra from 20:24. Medical advances in human longevity aside, the total lunar eclipse that will grace South Africa tonight is the 17th of its kind this century and there’s still 68 more to come. But not all of them will be visible from South Africa, very few will be during the early part of the evening and none will be as long. At 1 hour 43 minutes and 35 seconds, to be exact, the total lunar eclipse will be the longest of the 230 scheduled lunar eclipses to take place this century. The shortest took place on April 4 2015 (11m53s) but Africa was not honoured with its presence. The next longest one will be in March 2025, but South Africa will not have a clear sight. “What happens is that the earth moves between the sun and the moon and the shadow of the earth falls onto the moon,” Jooste says, explaining that there are two shadows the umbra and the penumbra and during a total eclipse the umbra is the dark shadow that we see. Total lunar eclipses only happen during a full moon, Jooste says and this is why you can see the eclipse so clearly sometimes because of the contrast of the shadow and bright reflective light of the moon. However, what you will also notice tonight is the a distinctive reddish hue to the moon which is sometimes referred to as the blood moon. “It’s not dangerous at all, unless you see a werewolf,” the astronomer says before we break out into laughter again. “The red light passes through the atmosphere with the blue light stripped away from it and it falls onto the moon turning it a dark brown colour and sometimes red,” this process is called refraction as sunlight is deflected through Earth’s atmosphere. “If there is a lot of dust in the atmosphere, like volcanic activity this dust settles in the upper atmosphere and causes the moon to have a redder colour,” Jooste says, making reference to volcanic activity near Hawaii recently that would most likely turn tonight’s moon a deep red. But that’s not the only red you’ll see in the sky tonight. The red planet, Mars will also be on full display, quite close in direction to the moon, Jooste says, as Mars is approaching its closest point to earth. But its not the only planetary body that will be visible. “We are very fortunate, as it is a rare event, that we will have all five visible planets in horizon after sunset. Shortly after sunset we can see mercury, then we’ll see Venus in the western sky, we’ve got Jupiter overhead which is very bright, we’ve got Saturn which would be at the tail of Scorpio and then Mars.” “It is the closest and brightest Mars has been - and the biggest - we have seen it since 2003,” Jooste says and the excitement is distinctly discernible in his voice. All this and more will be viewable from Johannesburg’s “highest point”, the Astronomical Society’s very own observatory. The large telescope will be used to view the craters on the moon change colour as well as the heavenly bodies, while through the smaller telescopes you will see the moon in all its eclipse glory. There will also be hot chocolate and different colour fires to keep you warm, as Jooste thrills adults and kids about the stars, the moon and the eclipse. So can scientist learn anything during an eclipse? Yes they can, the light reflected from the moon is less harsh and this allows them to observe a more complete picture of the starry night during a full moon. There is also the fact that the surface of the moon cools quickly during an eclipse allowing scientists to use infrared cameras to try and understand its surface better. • Maybe binoculars, if you’re so inclined • A star chart or you can download Google’s SkyMap • Warm clothing! Best place to view an eclipse? Jooste says you two things to work in your favour, one there needs to be clear skies and two there needs to be little to no light pollution. If he had to choose a place where it might be great to see the Milky Way, the moon and everything in between, it would be in the Karoo or the Kalahari. There will also be a live streaming event of the full lunar eclipse that will swing between Johannesburg and Santorini in Greece, which Nasa will push throughout the world. And with clear skies forecast for tonight Joburg has a front row seat to a one-night only, never to be repeated in our lifetime spectacle, thrown and hosted by the greatest storyteller of all, the universe! Happy viewing! 