Police Minister Bheki Cele’s spokesperson has said that engagements with the Zwelihle community in the seaside town of Hermanus will continue once a missing firearm has been returned. Cele met briefly with the protesters on the township sports field to discuss their grievances, leaving very soon into the meeting after the minister gave them a 72-hour ultimatum to return a missing firearm. A member of the SAPS’s Public Order Policing unit, currently hospitalised, was robbed of his 9mm firearm and shotgun during a protest in the area last night. A group of rioters attacked the officer with an axe, severely injuring his head before taking his firearms. Only the shotgun has since been recovered. “One of our members was struck in the face with an axe. That member was transported to hospital where he has undergone an operation. We then stepped up our visibility and operations. “We have searched for the suspects and firearms. Out of the three firearms that were dispossessed from our members, two shotguns and a hand gun, so far we’ve recovered a shot gun and arrested two suspects,” the SAPS said. Cele’s visit to Zwelihle comes after two weeks of protests which were initially over land but escalated after the arrest of several community leaders and alleged instigators. Protesters clashed with police and were dispersed with rubber bullets and tear gas while using corrugated iron as protective shields, throwing rocks at officers in retaliation. A number of roads in were barricaded with sewage pipes‚ tyres and concrete torn out of sidewalks. Last week, the area was described as a war zone between police and the residents, when they were demanding the release of one of the community leaders. The unrest had reportedly flared up after a memorandum was handed over to the police where the residents demanded the withdrawal of charges against the community leader. Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Francois Beukman, has strongly condemned the attack and said that attacks on SAPS members were a direct attack on the constitutional order. The committee said that it stood by its view that citizens who attack members of the police should face the full wrath of the law and the courts should deal with them accordingly. Cele said that riot police would be deployed to the township to avoid any possible protests over the coming week. Community members fear that unrests will flare up again due to the minister’s departure without fully hearing them out.