A political breakthrough last week has paved the way for the previously interdicted KwaZulu-Natal ANC elective conference to go ahead. This, after the warring factions met in Pietermaritzburg on Friday to strike an out-of-court settlement. The agreement, which was expected to be made an order of court, meant that earlier plans to oppose last month’s Pietermaritzburg High Court interdict were now off and conference delegates could convene, starting on Thursday. The venue was yet to be announced. Since the court ruling, a national intervention team led by ANC deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte had been in the province to solve problems particularly in regions such as Moses Mabhida, Lower South Coast and Harry Gwala. The process saw branches that had complained about being excluded from participating in processes leading to the provincial conference being given an opportunity to participate in fresh branch general meetings and “everybody seemed comfortable”, according to insiders. Although lobbying for the top five posts was still ongoing, early indications were that former provincial chairperson and interim leadership co-ordinator Sihle Zikalala would be uncontested for the position, according to those close to him. But former deputy chair Willies Mchunu and the convener of the interim leadership in KwaZulu-Natal, Mike Mabuyakhulu, were still in the mix. In the absence of a credible leadership, the ANC in the province has struggled to contain strong sentiments against the party and its head, President Cyril Ramaphosa, who has had to step in to calm issues – as happened when he met Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini to apologise for the misunderstanding that the governing party wanted to take the land of his people without compensation. One of the lead contenders for the top five posts, Mdumiseni Ntuli, who lobbied for the position of secretary, told City Press that “it does not serve the ANC for us to work towards making divisions permanent”. If so, he said, “you do not have the interests of the ANC at heart. So, it is not sustainable to label each other according to which side you chose in previous conferences.” In the event that Ntuli accepted nomination, he could face off against former provincial secretary Super Zuma. Ntuli said that when he was approached by lobbyists from the Greater KwaDukuza region, Musa Dladla region and the provincial youth league, he told them he had “never declined any responsibility given by the ANC”, including when he was still serving in the youth league. “I am one of the younger generations and a recent graduate of the youth league. So when I’m approached by so many people ... it displays a vote of confidence,” he said. Ntuli said so-called anti-Ramaphosa sentiment in KwaZulu-Natal was dissipating. He said Ramaphosa was the ANC president now and “we all respect that, so anyone who does not respect that does not understand the ANC”.