Eskom has announced the possibility of “stage one load shedding” from 5pm to 9pm on Tuesday evening as a result of workers embarking on industrial action following unsuccessful wage negotiations between workers unions and the utility. The utility warned that strikes by its workers affiliated to the National Union of Mineworkers and National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa posed a risk to energy supply as the strikes continued to affect operations at Eskom’s power stations. “The electricity system remains constrained with a high probability of stage 1 rotational load shedding this evening from 5pm to 9pm as a result of the industrial action which continues to impact operations at Eskom’s sites,” said Eskom spokesperson Khulu Phasiwe. Phasiwe revealed that the state-owned entity had done all in its power to alleviate the situation even seeking “the services of the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration to facilitate the engagement between the organisation and union leaders to resolve the impasse. “We are hopeful that all parties will put South Africa first as we endeavour in finding an amicable solution,” said Phasiwe. The spokesperson also assured South Africans that the South African Police Service has been mobilised to maintain order and to enable safe access to power stations because these were national key points. Trader union Solidarity has condemned the “elements of sabotage at Eskom” that are forcing the utility to resort to load shedding. “There are factions who damage infrastructure and threaten the country’s electricity stability under the pretext of wage negotiations. Solidarity members who want to keep South Africa’s lights on are intimidated and are even being threatened with violence. “Solidarity has requested today that Eskom and the police service must strongly act against elements of sabotage at Eskom,” said Solidarity chief operations officer Dirk Hermann. According to Hermann, “there must be a clear distinction between collective bargaining and criminality. The first is a legitimate process of power play and the other is criminal and should be prosecuted”. As it stands, Eskom has advised that stage 1 load shedding was on the cards. However, Phasiwe said the utility “will advise if load shedding will be conducted in either; stage 1, stage 2, stage 3 or stage 4, dependent on the capacity shortage”. Phasiwe explained that “stage 1 load shedding required 1000MW to be rotationally load shed nation-wide, stage 2 required 2000MW, stage 3 required 3000MW and stage 4 called for up to 4000MW to be rotationally load shed nationally at a given period.” Load shedding is conducted rotationally as a measure of last resort to protect the power system from a total collapse or blackout. The power utility has encouraged residents and businesses to use electricity sparingly to ease the demand of electricity. “Please switch off geysers during the day especially during peak periods (5am to 10am and 5pm to 10pm) as well as all non-essential lighting and electricity appliances to assist in reducing demand,” said Phasiwe. Customers were also advised to keep checking their load-shedding schedules on the Eskom or municipal website, and plan on the assumption that load shedding will take place.