The return of Saviour Kasukuwere, a rival of President Emerson Mnangagwa, to Harare last week has caused uneasiness inside the opposition National Patriotic Front (NPF), which is associated with former Zimbabwean leader Robert Mugabe and his allies. The NPF is mainly comprised of former Zanu-PF leaders who pushed for the ousting of Mnangagwa and the elevation of Grace Mugabe. Kasukuwere, a former cabinet minister and close ally of Robert Mugabe during their days in power, fled Zimbabwe in November last year, together with Jonathan Moyo and Patrick Zhuwao, when the military took over power. The three were reportedly pushing for Mugabe’s wife, Grace, to succeed Mugabe. Kasukuwere has been in self-imposed exile since then and only returned last week. His return has stoked up tensions in the NPF amid fears from some members that he cut deals with Mnangagwa, now leader of Zanu-PF, to avoid prosecution. His return has also fuelled speculation that he is back home to take over leadership of the NPF, although he has dismissed this. “I am happy to be back home. But no more politics for me,” he told City Press. On Wednesday, Kasukuwere said on Twitter that “love had brought him back home” while he had been unexpectedly pushed away by life. “Life takes you to unexpected places, love brings you home. I landed at Robert Gabriel Mugabe Airport after six months away from our beloved land,” he said. Those on the same flight with Kasukuwere said the former Zanu-PF political commissar looked lonely and lost in thought as he flew from Johannesburg to Zimbabwe. He is believed to have been holed up in Kenya for most of his exile period. “He was in deep thought and he basically did not move out of his seat. We tried to have a conversation with him but he was not very interested, and he did not finish his food,” said a source who was on the same flight. The tweet by Kasukuwere on Wednesday morning has been interpreted differently inside Zimbabwe and inside the NPF party linked to Mugabe. “He has returned to lead our party because we can’t trust anyone else and we need someone who is vibrant. Mnangagwa wants to be seen as someone who is not retributive and who is all about nation building. "We exploited that and we used it to negotiate for the return of Tyson [Kasukuwere’s nickname],” an NPF member said after a meeting in rural Zvimba on Thursday. NPF spokesperson Jealousy Mawarire told City Press that Kasukuwere, Zhuwao and Moyo were not members of the NPF, but emphasised the party would benefit from having them as members because they command large followings. “There is nothing to be afraid of regarding the return of Kasukuwere to Zimbabwe. We are not even moved. Kasukuwere, Zhuwao and Moyo are not members of the NPF, but they are welcome to join us,” Mawarire said by phone. “We want their skills and the following they have as we want to strengthen our structures ahead of the elections.” While the NPF was rocked by in-fighting last week, Mnangagwa’s Zanu-PF party was also battling to quell some divisions. A close ally of Mnangagwa, Terrence Mukupe, who is also deputy finance minister, had to be reprimanded for a statement he made that the army will not hand over power to opposition leader, Nelson Chamisa, if he wins the election expected to be held this year. Zanu-PF spokesperson Khaya Moyo was not available for comment. However, Zanu-PF insiders said there is growing pressure for Mnangagwa to dismiss the deputy finance minister, who has been accused of assaulting the journalist who covered the story on his statement about the military. The deputy minister is accused of assaulting the journalist inside a radio station studio on Thursday evening. The Zimbabwe Congress of Trade Unions has also demanded that Mukupe be fired, saying a reprimand was not enough.