Former ANC member of Parliament and singer Jennifer Ferguson has released a statement denying “slanderous” allegations of conspiring with Irvin Khoza to defame South African Football Association president Danny Jordaan. Reports emerged this week that rape-accused Jordaan, through his lawyer, opened a case against Premier Soccer League chairperson Khoza, claiming that he was trying to derail Jordaan’s hopes of winning the upcoming Safa elections by supporting Ferguson by paying for her flights and accommodation. READ: Jordaan charges rape accuser In October last year, Ferguson accused Jordaan of raping her in a Port Elizabeth hotel room more than 20 years ago. There are supposedly emails to support the claim that Khoza made payments to Ferguson for her flight to South Africa from Sweden, where she currently resides. In her statement, however, Ferguson said that the air ticket payment was done through the Forgotten Angle Theatre Company, because she had been invited to perform a series of concerts. READ: Safa boss raped me – Ferguson “The Forgotten Angle Theatre Collaborative has partnered in the JENNIFER#WeToo Concerts and the #WeToo Campaign, along with The Baxter Theatre. They have provided project management, facilitated fundraising, donations, invoicing and payments. All budgetary controls and payments are done through them. The Baxter Theatre has also taken some responsibility for management of related costs (sic),” the statement reads.  With an accompanying invoice confirming payment of the tickets, the statement stated: • The Baxter Theatre provided rental free space and staff; • The Raith Foundation provided core “emergency” funding covering basic costs including air travel, choir transport, catering and posters; • Sound was sponsored by Eastern Acoustics with the sound engineer working for free; • A car was provided by The Baxter Theatre; • All musicians and guest artists, including Ferguson, worked for an honorarium of R5000 in total with R2000 for rehearsals; and • Many other people, such as the choir, the runner, a photographer and the stage manager contributed their services with extraordinary generosity, working for small honorariums. Iron Duke denies allegations of conspiracy During a press conference at the PSL headquarters on Thursday, Khoza also denied all allegations against him, saying they were “absurd”. READ: ‘The gloves are off’, says Irvin Khoza as he rubbishes Danny Jordaan’s claims Khoza said he had never met or had any contact with Ferguson. “I’ve called you here today to tell you, unequivocally, I don’t know Ms Jennifer Ferguson, nor have I ever spoken to her or anyone who knows her,” Khoza said. “To the full extent of the law, I’m not going to stop at anything until my name is cleared by my accusers. “The charges of defamation, criminal collusion and conspiracy, which the media is quoting, are unfounded and have no bearing on the truth,” he said.