Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga has asked for a full report from provincial heads of department into the circumstances that led to the death of two schoolgirls in the North West. Expressing concern over the rise in numbers of young women killed at the hands of their boyfriends, or ex-boyfriends, Motshekga on Tuesday demanded that provincial heads of department look into how the murder suspect gained access to the school’s dormitory. “It is shocking and deeply disturbing how many of our young women are killed at the hands of their boyfriends, or ex-boyfriends. “We need to see all stakeholders playing a role in ensuring that the integrated strategy for school safety is implemented to protect our learners against perpetrators of violence as we have seen in this particular case and indeed others like it,” said Motshekga. The minister was referring to the deaths of Marna Engelbrecht (17) and Sharnelle Hough (16). They were found hanged at a school in Stella in the North West on Saturday by a matron. A 19-year-old suspect, Zander Bylsma, has been arrested and appeared in the Vryburg Magistrates’ Court on Monday. Lieutenant-Colonel Amanda Funani said the accused was remanded in custody until August 6 when his bail application would be heard. Funani indicated that, in the meantime, investigations would be going ahead. “There is compelling evidence that led to the arrest of the accused, who is believed to be an ex-boyfriend of one of the two girls, however since the court proceeding are still under way, I am not at liberty to share that information with the media,” said Funani. However, Funani confirmed that Engelbrecht’s body was found hanging from rails by the matron. “When the police did the investigation Hough’s body was discovered in the hostel bathroom.” Motsheka said there was a need to send out a strong message that the lives of women and girls mattered. “We [women] are not disposable and justice needs to deal harshly with anyone who takes the life of a woman or a girl in such a senseless manner, as in this case where the bright future of these two young girls has been prematurely stolen from them,” said Motshekga North West education MEC Sello Lehari also expressed his sadness at the deaths. “The passing on of these two learners is a very tragic incident and we believe that the police will get to the bottom of the matter,” said Lehari. According to Lehari, the two Grade 11 pupils were going to join their teammates on Sunday for netball in Koster. “Normally the learners are accommodated at school from Monday until Friday. Other girls went home on Friday, and the deceased learners requested to be accommodated at school the night before since they stayed far from the school,” said Lehari. Parliament’s education portfolio committee chairperson Nomalungelo Gina condemned femicide and any form of violence against women and children saying: “Surely our young men cannot be thinking that this is a way to address challenges. The gruesome manner in which these young girls were killed is truly shocking.” Gina however praised the police for the speedy arrest of the suspect. “We need to ensure that justice is served speedily. This will send the correct message that criminality and cowardly acts will not be tolerated.” The current incident of femicide comes during child protection week and the South African Human’s rights commission released a statement saying the Constitution laid the foundation for the championing of the rights of children and urged that these rights must be realised for children to develop their full potential, “free from neglect and abuse”. This incident comes after Sandile Mantsoe was earlier this month sentenced to a cumulative 32 years in prison after murdering his ex-girlfriend Karabo Mokoena and on the day of his sentencing, Thabani Mzolo allegedly shot and killed his ex-girlfriend Zolile Khumalo.   