Many South African YouTube creators have built respectable audiences for themselves, and some, careers as well. But who are the faces of the booming industry? Google invited YouTube creators to their vibrant offices in Bryanston, Johannesburg. By invite only, the YouTube creators met and networked with brand representatives, media and fellow creators. Following a lengthy networking session of introductions before the event, the invited guests – Champagne glasses and hearty hors d’oeuvres in hand – congregated for an interactive panel discussion about the entrepreneurial, financial and collaborative aspects of YouTube in South Africa. “For brands, creators offer an opportunity to reach targeted, engaged audiences that really want to watch the content they generate. "But many do not know how to go about approaching creators. YouTube facilitates this discussion by hosting Creator meets Brand events,” said Mich Atagana, head of communications at Google. On the panel addressing the guests were YouTube creators Moyin Oloruntoba from The A1, Grant Hinds, and Fashion Breed’s Aqeelah Harron Ally. These YouTube creators and entrepreneurs show a diverse picture of some of the most successful individuals in this growing industry. “Because we’re creating on a global platform, it gives people a perspective of South Africaness – the culture and people – and shows and represents us as individuals and as three black women,” said Thembekile Mahlaba. Harron Ally, who has seen great success in a niche audience with modest fashion, is very optimistic about the direction the YouTube creator industry is taking. “It is definitely evolving but I never see that as a bad thing. The fact that we are behind in so many things – in terms of the infrastructure in our country– I always think that means we can learn from other people’s mistakes, we can see where we are going,” she said. After an exuberant question and answer session the high-spirited guests networked, shared business cards and snapped away in front of cameras in the colourful venue. 