Gauteng Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi has instructed the school governing body of Parktown Boys High to review the school’s code of conduct to stipulate clear a procedure for reporting and managing incidents of abuse and other matters. Lesufi was visiting the school on Tuesday to report on the outcome of an investigation into various allegations of victimisation of learners and parents. The school became the centre of attention last year after the former water polo assistant coach was accused of sexually assaulting and preying on at least 20 pupils in 2015. Reports followed of allegations that some of the boys, aged between 12 and 16, were being victimised by teachers after they came forward with information. Speaking to learners at the school hall, Lesufi implored them to “break the culture of silence” and speak out against any violation and report cases without fear of being victimised. He said that the culture of silence in the school had impeded the gathering of evidence. Among the allegations being investigated was a matter involving four educators – two employed by the department and two by the school governing body – who were implicated in allegations of racism. Lesufi said the educators would be put on precautionary suspension from the school before the end of this week, followed by a disciplinary hearing that would be held at a later stage. “We don’t want to interfere with what they’re teaching. We’re saying they shouldn’t discriminate and portray an image that one race is more important than another, or that they’re invading their privacy and are not welcome here. If you do that, you’ve touched us. “We are on course to protect public education. Any person who wants to tarnish the image of the school will be dealt with accordingly. Learners must be protected, educators must teach and not violate learners or commit any misconduct. “All learners must be treated equally and their dignity protected in our institutions. Any form of discrimination and abuse would not be tolerated,” he said. “There was an allegation that learners were smeared with deep heat on their private parts. No evidence was found. We strongly believe that the culture of silence might have played a major role. “On allegations that learners were compelled to use the same blade to shave‚ a new process must be implemented with immediate effect to avert such unhygienic practices‚” Lesufi said. “There was also an allegation that strippers were brought to the school hostel night parties, of which no evidence was found,” he added. The MEC also strongly criticised the sale of alcohol at the school and advised that the liquor licence granted to the bar be revoked. The bar is located within the school precinct. Lesufi concluded his visit with the announcement that the process of appointing a new principal had been completed and that he would start his new job on June 1.