An ANC youth league leader accused of raping and assaulting a sex worker is expected to apply for bail in the East London Magistrates’ Court on Wednesday. The Sex Workers Education and Advocacy Taskforce (Sweat) and Sisonke, a national movement for sex workers in South Africa, picketed outside the court, demanding that the accused be denied bail. The accused, whose identity is still being withheld because he has not yet lodged a formal plea, is believed to be a provincial task team leader of the league. The Daily Dispatch newspaper reported that the 38-year-old suspect was arrested after he allegedly assaulted and raped a 28-year-old woman. The paper reported that the two met in Quigney, a suburb of East London, and agreed to go to the suspect’s home. Instead, he drove to a park, where he allegedly raped and assaulted her. Sisonke East London Coordinator, Shaun Bibi, confirmed that the accused was a known ANC youth league leader in the area. Sweat and Sisonke staff in East London had received numerous complaints about “a certain client” who had resorted to terrorising sex workers in East London. At least 10 cases had been reported to Sweat and Sisonke. “The victim managed to flee from the clutches of her assailant and in her flight she saw a police van and went straight to it to report the matter,” said Bibi. “We have an accused in our custody who is appearing in court for a bail application this morning, and who is accused of assault and rape. The first victim managed to escape and during the escape she saw a police car and she sought assistance,” said Captain Mluleki Mdi, who was stationed at Cambridge Police Station where the accused was incarcerated. After recounting her dilemma to the police the victim led officers to the scene of the alleged assault and rape, where Mdi said they found the accused raping another woman. Bibi added that to his knowledge Cambridge Police Station had six other reported cases of a client terrorising sex workers. Bibi said the spate of rape and violence against sex workers in East London was concerning, and reflected the environment that sex workers were exposed to. “Sex workers are not safe in their homes or in public spaces,” said Bibi. The case was a blow to the strides made by the ANC at its national elective conference in 2017 when it undertook to support the decriminalisation of sex work in South Africa. If the resolution to decriminalise sex work was successful it would mean that all criminal laws against the sex trade would be lifted and sex workers would be able to report such cases and the police could play their part in protecting sex workers. “We call on the judge to deny bail for the suspect and that the case be treated with the outmost importance because sex workers continue to suffer injustices under the current full criminalisation of sex work in South Africa. “We also call on the ANC leadership in the Eastern Cape to condemn such barbaric act by one of their members as it hampers on the strides already made,” said Bibi.