Lectures at the Walter Sisulu University (WSU) main campus were suspended last week after violent confrontations between students and the security company employed by the institution. The university’s Nelson Mandela Drive Site Campus in Mthatha is known for its violent protests. Last week’s protests and student demands for the Fidelity Security company to be fired were sparked by alleged assaults on students by security guards. In one video City Press has seen, two Fidelity Security guards can be seen assaulting a male student at a study centre at the Mthatha campus apparently for making a noise and refusing to leave when security instructed him to. But the university’s management is adamant that the protest is related to drug busts at the institution, during which a number of students were arrested. Mziwandile Ntlabathi (24), a first-year Bachelor of Science in Statistics student, said he was shot by a security guard on campus on March 24 when he tried to break up a fight between two students. He said the security guard shot him in the upper body at close range without asking any questions. “Those rubber bullets really hit me hard and I was bleeding. When I was lying on the ground breathing heavily, I could see that one of the rubber bullets had hit me on the left side of the ribcage, which is very close to the heart. "I was anxious and I thought I was going to die. I was scared because the ambulance took long to arrive,” he said. Ntlabathi, who was admitted to the Nelson Mandela Academic Hospital in central Mthatha where he stayed for three weeks after he underwent an operation, said he supported calls for the security company to vacate campus. “Why should they stay? Those people have a violent trail of destruction against the students whom they are employed to protect. They must leave before they kill us,” he said. He said he was now consulting lawyers with a view of lodging a claim against the university. Luvo Kasa, the student representative council’s academic officer, said the students’ position was that they did not want the security company on campus. “We are aware of the lies being spread by the university management that we are striking because of drug busts on campus – that is entirely untrue. "We are chasing the security company because they are shooting students left, right and centre. In the latest incident a student was beaten up at the study centre. “There are many incidents of this security company using excessive force against students and where security have shot at students. The company does not protect students, instead it shoots and assaults them,” said Kasa. He said students told management there was no need to suspend teaching and learning at the school as they did not have a problem with the staff. “As long as Fidelity remains outside the premises, we are fine. We want classes to continue, but it is the management of the university that says the staff must not come because they are not safe. That is quite surprising,” Kasa said. University spokesperson Yonela Tukwayo did not respond to calls and text messages for comment. In March, WSU vice-chancellor and professor Rob Midgley closed down the Mthatha, Butterworth and Buffalo City campuses following student protests about accommodation and poor infrastructure development at the university.