The ANC has called on South Africans to join the “Thuma Mina” campaign in the wake of gang violence, political killings and service delivery issues. This call was made following the NEC’s three day meeting over the weekend that focused on the campaign, among other issues. ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule said the campaign is “an organisational initiative to mobilise ANC structures and especially our communities to become active agents in addressing basic services in their communities working with their governments”. Magashule said the ANC dedicates the first weekend of every month to addressing community issues and all societal issues facing South Africans. “We are therefore making a call for all South Africans to join the #ThumaMina campaign,” he said. Among other issues, the contentious issue the NEC was expected to respond to was the alleged politically motivated killings in KwaZulu-Natal. “The ANC remains deeply alarmed by the spate of criminal targeted killings through the country and especially in KZN and recently in Gert Sibande region, in Mpumalanga,” said Magashule. “We have noted these killings. Killings are killings, they are criminal – it’s a criminal thing you can’t term it ‘political’,” he added. In response to the gang violence in the Western Cape Magashule said: “I think it is a societal challenge and that’s why we want our communities to be involved in making sure that we fight against these violent killings, murders, we fight against gangsterism, the communities must be involved.” Magashule added that the NEC also discussed economic transformation, land reform and agrarian revolution in line with land expropriation without compensation policy and the state of municipalities following the Auditor-General report. “Our land reform and agrarian revolution must at its core empower women. And the ANC task team on land reform will, therefore, intensify its engagements with all stakeholders, including communities, municipalities, private sector and other large land owners, famers and property developers on the issues of land redistribution,” said Magashule. He said the traditional leaders will also be included in such engagements because “they are part of the motive forces”. He said the government will use Section 25 of the Constitution for the expropriation of land without compensation. Should it find that this section doesn’t allow for execution of the policy, only then will the Constitution be amended. “The NEC calls for broader based public participation of all South Africans in the constitutional review process,” he said.