A man caught on CCTV footage assaulting a pregnant woman at Featherbrooke Village Mall in Ruimsig west of Johannesburg has defended his actions, claiming that he is not a mad man who attacked a defenceless and innocent woman without cause. Romeo Makhubela, who was at the time of the incident the chief executive of Novare Consultants, was caught on CCTV footage repeatedly slapping a pregnant Bianca Fourie just outside the entrance to a fast food outlet in the mall following an alleged parking row. Makhubela on Wednesday explained his actions saying, “for the past few days I have observed in silence stories of my altercation with a woman from the West Rand. “The stories and the video circulated projects me as a mad man who without cause attacked a defenceless and innocent woman. I believe it I have reached a point where it is important to reveal my side of the story so as to dismiss these eccentric and exaggerated elaborate lies that are peddled against me.” Makhubela admitted that he was at the Featherbrooke Village Shopping Centre in the company of his two sons. “Our plan was to visit the Steers restaurant because my son wanted something to eat,” he explained. According to Makhubela, the altercation with Fourie, began when she blocked the way of several cars, to the irritation of several drivers behind her. “It was at this point that a screaming confrontation ensued between the woman and occupants of a car in front of us. During this period the woman was hurling insults at the black occupants in that car, said Makhubela. The former chief executive said: “After parking, my mistake was when I confronted the woman and asked her how she could hurl such insults in front of children. What I was not fully prepared for was that she would turn her rage against me with a barrage of racial slurs.” She called me the K word and I slapped her Makhubela said he was taken aback but when Fourie unceasingly referred to him as the “K word” and a “poephol” in front of his children and followed them to Steers, he “became overcome by anger and slapped her”. “Though I was still seething with anger, I managed to apologise to my children who had to experience not only their father being racially abused but also the fact that I slapped another person,” said Makhubela. After dropping his children at home, Makhubela proceeded to the Honeydew Police Station where he opened a case of crimen injuria. “I subsequently also proceeded to lay a complaint of racism with the equality court,” said Makhubela. It has since been established that Fourie is the daughter of Krugersdorp Freedom Front Plus councillor Amanda de Lange. After the altercation, De Lange said her eight-months pregnant daughter was assaulted and alleged that Makhubela became angry because her daughter pointed at him. Makhubela had since been suspended as chief executive of Novare Consultants. “In hindsight I know that I should not have allowed my anger to control me to a point where it was necessary to slap this woman and I am prepared to issue an unconditional apology to her for doing this,” said Makhubela. Makhubela however said he was not prepared to let Fourie get away with calling him “the K word and other racial insults.”    