This Satafrika of Ramapostponer seems to be going nowhere very fast. Son of Mahumapelo resigned, revoked his resignation from himself, summoned himself to a meeting to decide his own fate and, surprisingly, Supra the Chairperson placed Supra the Premier on special leave and the Supra on Leave appointed an acting premier to act as Supra too, resulting in Supra not leaving but multiplying. Just when one thought this Msanzi needed to have its battery taken out and reinserted and the restart button pressed, then Son of Manana was at it again. Luckily this time those sleepists in Parly decided to wake up, even in the absence of the red berets’ voices. So I decide to convene a Nahab (National Association of Husbands and Boyfriends) meeting at Konkodi’s Tavern and to my surprise even that heathen Sister Bettinah made an appearance, probably to spy on Konkodi. Before we even got to the business of the day, Son of Nkwanyana, the pencil of Etshodo, announced that a municipality in the land of Supra coughed up a billion rand on a tender gifted to their friends without advertising it, even to Nahab. Nkwanyana also said that Manana was at it again and this time he was caught trying to cover up his heavy-handed ways with R100 000. But fortunately those blue berets of Mymoney vowed to drag him kicking and screaming to the nearest jail cells. I doubt that will happen, since he belongs to the party in Sauer Street. True that! According to the woke media, those supporting Manana through his abusive shenanigans were from Rent-A-Crowd and, when they bumped into him, it was payday. With the preliminary drinks wetting the throats, Son of Mongale, the Willow of Sofaya, whispered that apparently the great Brian of the Molefe Clan, the mighty Guptanite, had assisted his then handlers to loot Transnet. No surprises there obviously. Mongale also said he heard over the wireless that apparently VBS was in bed with at least 15 municipalities and its downfall will probably affect all of them. Methinks its Lesetja of the Kganyago clan’s fault, period and end of story. Son of Mokone, the Mpho of Lebowakgomo, claimed Manana is not the only trash in Msanzi and that apparently every four hours, a woman is killed by her partner in this godforsaken country of the serial Ramapostponer. Talking about our president, I swear I read somewhere that he cancelled his meeting in London to rush home to deal with Supra … that was weeks ago and Supra, both of them, are still in power over there. Apparently Ramapostponer has even started parliamentary processes to put that province under administration, like his predecessor did to Limpopo a few years ago. This in addition to the interministerial committee. Methinks he is not decisive, just like his party. Konkodi, who was awfully silent throughout, said Son of Mosimane apparently thinks after conquering the local league, his Sundowners can match Barcelona of Messi. Obviously Mosimane is also known to have a dry sense of humour and one only hopes this was one of his attempted jokes. With the bottom of the brown beer bottles nearing and all throats on site well-wetted, yours truly pronounced that Nahab, as a pillar of society all over, should contest the next elections and obviously the president should be someone with impeccable credentials, amazing capacity to endure enormous volumes of the drink of the gods and of course have the much-missed charm and dances moves of the Jacob of Nkandla. With the pronouncement well-accepted, besides for Son of Mokou, the Rakgwatha of Sebora who I immediately showed the gate for being anti-progress and unpatriotic, the motion was adopted and made official. With that major business out of the way, I loudly alerted the ignorant charlatans that not only does De Lille deserve what those privileged DA folks are doing to her, she deserves to restart her party, get fired from it and finally join Outa too. After all, she betrayed her Independent Democrats many years ago. • Majakathata the Rogue is a comrade, director of Nahab (National Association of Husbands and Boyfriends) and chairperson of Asphuzeni Stokvel in Skomplaas, Mashishing.