Justice for the Sukhraj family would mean more than nailing the men who killed a nine-year-old girl in a hijacking. It would mean an overhaul of the entire system – higher penalties for criminals, safer streets, and help for vulnerable children. The community of Shallcross in Chatsworth, in southern KwaZulu-Natal, has sprung into action following the death of Sadia Sukhraj, who was shot in a botched hijacking on Monday. Sadia, who was a Grade 4 pupil at Mount Everest Primary School, was shot in the abdomen during what began as a normal Monday morning school run. Sadia was in the vehicle with her father Shailendra, when he was approached by three men who attempted to hijack them in the driveway of Sadia’s grandfather’s house. Shailendra tried fighting off the hijackers while they drove off with Sadia still in the car. A short way away, the hijackers lost control of the car and crashed. During the commotion, an off-duty police officer witnessed what was happening and he pursued the suspects. It was alleged that the shot which he had fired had killed Sadia, but his involvement in her death was ruled out by the police. Sadia’s funeral was held on Tuesday. More than 3000 mourners, many of whom were complete strangers to the family, gathered at the Christian Revival Centre to pay their respects to the family. A haven for crime According to Crime Stats South Africa, Chatsworth was rated as the fifth-highest crime precinct in the province last year. Residents said that the area had become a haven for criminals, and complained that the police had failed to take action against the increasing crime. Shortly after a suspect was arrested, community members set up a blockade outside the Chatsworth Police Station. What followed over the next few days was nothing less than mass community mobilisation, in a bid to try and get the local authorities to take swift action. Increasing tension in the area resulted in “mob justice”, according to the KwaZulu-Natal police, who arrested 20 protestors on Tuesday night for “public violence”. About 1000 protestors had gathered to demand that the suspect, who was in custody, be released to the community members. An online petition was also started, calling for Parliament to institute harsher punishments against criminals in order to try and help curtail the growing spate of crime in the area. The Jems Foundation, a non-profit organisation located in Isipingo Hills, Durban, started an online petition on Change.org, calling for #JusticeForSadia. The petition has already reached 57 000 signatories. Founder of the organisation, Shailen Singh, said that at the organisation’s goal was to help children who were vulnerable and in need of assistance. “We really need to look for solutions when it comes to criminal activity. We are looking at what can be done to move forward as a community. Crime against children is common, and for this to happen during Child Protection Week is even more reason why the authorities need to pay greater attention to the scourge of crime,” Singh said. “We are imploring all South Africans to sign this petition and force Parliament, which serves as our legislature, to look into Section 51 of South Africa’s Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1997. We are calling for stricter sentences for convicted murderers, rapists and perpetrators of violent crimes,” the petition reads. Singh said that it did not necessarily mean bringing back the death penalty, but that the current system was failing communities. “For me it’s about creating awareness and seeking justice for what has happened to Sadia,” Singh said. Once the petition reaches 75 000 signatories, Singh will be writing letters to Police Minister Bheki Cele and the chief whips of the political parties to gain traction as to “why the South African Police Service continues to fail in its duty to protect the citizens of our country”. “It is a long-term goal; obviously it’s not going to happen overnight,” Singh said. Earlier on Wednesday, KwaZulu-Natal MEC for transport, community safety and liaison, Mxolisi Kaunda, paid a visit to the Sukhraj family, and asserted his commitment to getting justice by finding the third suspect, who allegedly fled on foot after the botched hijacking. The second suspect died on the scene. “The MEC met with the provincial commissioner and the management of the Chatsworth police station this morning to discuss plans to deal with the current situation, focusing on trio crimes,” Mluleki Mntungwa, spokesperson for the MEC told City Press. Trio crimes, Mntungwa said, comprised car, business and home robberies. “He has assured the community of increased police visibility, including stop and search operations which will now take place on vehicles and even people who are walking on the street,” Mntungwa said. “This morning when the MEC visited the Sukhraj family, and when he addressed the community, he assured them that the hunt for the third suspect who escaped the hijacking will be found, because police are working around the clock. The government is committed to reducing the scourge of crime in the area,” he said. Mntungwa said that the community was hopeful that the government would be able to assist with the issue of crime. “Fighting crime is a collective responsibility, government cannot do it alone and the MEC discussed this as well,” he said. 39-year-old Sibonelo Mkhize, who was apprehended at the scene on Monday, was charged with Sadia’s death, and appeared in the Durban Magistrates’ Court on Wednesday morning. ‘A no-nonsense approach’ Democratic Alliance leader Mmusi Maimane attended Sadia’s funeral on Tuesday, and led a prayer in tribute to the little girl. The Inkatha Freedom Party was also critical towards policing in KwaZulu Natal, and called for more police resources to be deployed in the Chatsworth area. “There is a need to deploy more police resources in Chatsworth,” said the party’s KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson for community safety and liaison, Blessed Gwala. “Police presence and a no-nonsense approach will continue to send a clear message that law enforcement is serious about reducing crime and getting rid of criminals from our communities. It is our view that criminals can only be defeated only if there is an increase in active visible policing.    