#UniteBehind has made a call to the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) to offer separate carriages for women, children and physically impaired to avoid sexual harassment and other forms of harassment. Prasa is participating in ongoing discussions about the proposal for separate carriages for women and children but had not made any promises to implement them. “This is great mechanism to ensure women’s safety,” said Bruce Baigrie from #UniteBehind. #UnitedBehind said the separate coaches were one measure that should be accompanied by other safety measures such as reporting mechanisms, proper lighting and CCTV cameras. “We believe these coaches could provide a safe space for women to avoid widespread sexual harassment and assault on our trains,” said Baigrie. Prasa spokesperson Nana Zenani refused to comment on the carriages while the discussions were taking place. “I cannot answer any questions because no decisions have been made,” she said. What Prasa has committed to do is provide chaperones in its train carriages to ensure the safety of children in the trains. “Children especially suffer from overcrowded carriages, they are pushed around and are unable to get on and off trains safely. The chaperone carriages will be there to provide them with a safe commute under the protection of chaperones who would also assist them getting on and off the train,” said Baigrie. “Most of the children who use the trains and indeed all public transport are unaccompanied by their parents who have to work,” he added. #UniteBehind has called for Prasa to also come up with a safety plan that prioritises the safety of people rather than just assets. Baigrie said there should be a safety plan in place that considers the “vulnerabilities and threats faced by certain groups such as women, children and the differently abled”. “We stand ready to assist them in implementing such a plan,” he said. Zenani also refused to comment on how the chaperoned carriages will work but confirmed that the Prasa will be implementing it.