The South African Banking Risk Operations Centre’s released its 2016/17 crime report and it was revealed that there has been a shocking 11% increase in cash-in-transit robberies. Up to 70% of cash-in-transit heists involve officials from the South African Police Service. Every aspect from missing dockets to the actual act of robbing these transit vehicles involves crooked SAPS members. The DA believes that it is time to completely overhaul the SAPS, as not only have our people lost confidence in the police to uphold the law, but in certain instances, they are the cause of crime. A justice system that has no consequences is not one that will function. We need to ensure that the culprits who endanger our lives and those of our loved ones are prosecuted. The DA wants to see a country where our children can walk the streets safely without being at risk of being hit by a stray bullet or abducted. It is critical that there is a monitoring system put in place that will monitor and evaluate police officers to ensure that they not subdued to corruption. The DA has on numerous occasions demanded that the anti-corruption unit be reinstated. This unit was highly active in the fight against police corruption. However, it was shut down by the ANC government because of its effectiveness. The same applies to the Scorpions, which was disbanded by the ANC government. The Independent Police Investigative Directorate must be better equipped and headed by an able and suitable individual who is untainted and is not caught up in some political saga. We therefore, also call upon the provincial commissioner to address us on what is being done in combating this escalating crisis. 2019 is the opportunity for South Africans to turn the tide on this crime epidemic. A vote for the DA is a vote for a professional police service, free from the corruption and gangsterism that has taken root in the service. We deserve a functional police service, one that we can be proud of and one that will ensure our safety. • Michele Clarke is the DA’s shadow MEC for community safety