In one of the most widely watched murder cases over the last year, Sandile Mantsoe has been found guilty of murdering his ex-girlfriend Karabo Mokoena. At the South Gauteng Magistrate’s Court on Wednesday, Mantsoe was found guilty on all three counts of defeating the ends of justice, premeditated murder and assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm. Mantsoe murdered Mokoena (22) in April 2017 – her body was discovered in a veld in Lyndhurst, burnt beyond recognition. Mantsoe – who is believed to be estranged from his wife and has three children – was in a romantic relationship with Mokoena from September 2016. During the seven months of their relationship, Mokoena confided in family members that Mantsoe was abusing her. Acting Judge Peet Johnson said that during the cross-examinations, Mantsoe stood as a weak witness, while many other witnesses came forward with far stronger statements. “He played his part well, that he was also collaborating in the search of Karabo,” Johnson said, referring to the supposed act Mantsoe had put up after Mokoena was reported missing. “He knew from his own admission that he took her body and burnt it beyond recognition,” Johnson continued. Mantsoe alleged that the police captain who arrested him had asked him for a bribe for him to be released. Johnson called this “a recent fabrication”. Some of Mantsoe’s family members were present, including his mother, sister, uncle and brother. Johnson said that despite Mokoena’s body being burnt, and given the previous evidence which was presented to the court by the state, Mokoena’s cause of death was stabbing. “The court, by inference, is able to conclude that she died by stabbing. She could not have died of anything else,” he said. Speaking on behalf of the ANC Women’s League outside court on Wednesday, Gauteng MEC for Social Development Nandi Mayathula-Khoza said that the league was happy that justice had been served. “The judge found the accused guilty and we are happy with the judgment. He [Mantsoe] tried to hide all the evidence but he has been found guilty anyway. We are looking for the maximum sentencing to be imposed but I also feel that he needs to get professional help because he is a sick young man. He needs to reflect and think about what he’s done,” Mayathula said. She added that despite the ongoing campaigns which the ANC in Gauteng, led by Premier David Makhura, engaged in with regards to ending violence against women and children, there were more cases like this. “It’s very said that there is femicide in our society. There are more and more cases like this which come to court, but we will continue to campaign and raise awareness and help to bring an end to this violence,” she said. Mantsoe had previously testified that Mokoena was suicidal and that she had overdosed on pills and slit her wrists. Judge Johnson ruled that out however, saying there was no inclination that Mokoena wanted to end her life and that she had every reason to live. Sentencing is expected to be delivered on Thursday.