Nomthandazo Mkhize Solomon gave up her career as a mezzo-soprano to teach opera to children in Katlehong, Gauteng. Solomon, who holds a Bachelor of Music degree in performance from the University of KwaZulu-Natal, says she wanted to make a difference. “The idea fascinated me. When I got here, I saw an abundance of talent and I realised that this is the path I wanted to take,” she says. Although one would struggle to find a more western art form than opera, Solomon says it is far from dead in South Africa which has an abundance of talent. The only threat to it, she says, is the lack of funding. Katlehong’s Ezibeleni Magnet School is staffed by five permanent teachers and two volunteers, all of whom have music qualifications. The school is part of the department of education’s initiative to attract musical talent in townships, which is being implemented in Gauteng. The school, which offers a variety of instruments including drums, guitar and classical voice, caters for schoolchildren around Kathlehong. Some of them, Solomon says, walk long distances to attend their lessons. “With teaching voice, I have to include music theory, music history and performance,” she says. “Most of the pupils that come here bring along raw talent, while some of them were discouraged at their schools.” Our teachers are patient and we teach them technique and they crack it, she says. The school focuses on an array of musical styles, including classical, African traditional and jazz, to broaden the horizons of its pupils. Solomon says the South African Schools’ Choral Eisteddfod is where it all starts for her vocalists. “Such an opportunity exposes the young musicians to a national stage and talent scouts,” she says. Some of her stars include Siyabonga Maqungo, who is currently on an opera internship in Germany. Another is Bongani Mthombeni, a tenor and a volunteer voice teacher at Ezibeleni. He started with Solomon when he was 14 years old, and he now has a diploma in music. Siyabonga Motloung, a promising tenor, mesmerised City Press with a South African opera composition, Ijadu, by Mzilikazi Khumalo, which saw him clinch second place at the South African Schools’ Choral Eisteddfod last year. Motloung has been under Solomon’s instruction for four years and he plans to study music next year. Solomon insists that thinking that opera is a discipline for the elite is a silly perception, especially because she comes from White City, one of Soweto’s poorest neighbourhoods. “Black people are not keen on pursuing a career in opera, but we are talented. Opera comes naturally to us,” she says. “Some of the pupils I deal with have no previous training, but if you hear them sing, you wouldn’t tell whether they’re trained or not.” Solomon says opera taught her discipline, which is what she now wants to pay forward to her young aspiring singers. “The fulfilment this gives me is amazing and when I think about my pupils I feel that I have something to live for,” she says. “Opera opens your mind to the idea that nothing comes easily. To be successful you need to work hard, which is what I teach my pupils. I want them to be confident and to believe in themselves. “I feel there’s a lot I need to give. Even if it’s to make a difference in one child’s life. When they sing, I sometimes cry.”