Discoveries of mass graves continue after the Rwandan genocide, sometimes because young people overhear their relatives talking about it It took three days of digging in the middle of the rainy season for community members to unearth the more than 200 corpses that had been lying in a mass grave underneath 18m of soil for close to 24 years. The digging followed confirmation from people convicted of involvement in Rwanda’s 1994 genocide, of information by residents in Gahoromani, a community about 15km outside Kigali, that victims had been buried inside what is now a private compound. Tutsis from the area were rounded up and taken to this place, never to be seen again. The grim discovery two weeks ago came in the 100 days of commemoration, starting on April 7, of what’s now officially been called the Genocide against the Tutsis. The depth of the grave, believed to be one of seven in the area, indicates that the perpetrators never wanted the bodies to be discovered, and that the mass murder was carefully planned, Naphtal Ahishakiye, executive secretary of survivors’ organisation Ibuka, told City Press. Ibuka is involved in helping survivors find loved ones. For more than two decades, the perpetrators kept quiet about the location of the mass grave. During the truth and reconciliation process by the Gacaca community courts, many perpetrators feared they could themselves face execution at the hands of the current government. Even when Ibuka became aware of the existence of these graves last year, people were reluctant to point out its location, Ahishakiye said. “Government institutions and civil society institutions try to call everybody who has information, to give it to us,” he said. “Sometimes the people don’t give the information, but sometimes they talk about it in their family.” Young relatives overheard this and went to the authorities with information about burial sites. They had a good understanding of this issue because of education programmes on unity and reconciliation at schools and in communities. He said the genocide commemoration period, which takes place every year for 100 days from April 7, sometimes encourages people to come forward with new information. At special events during this period, there is a collective outpouring of grief and tears as people recount the horror of what happened. Large banners are displayed across the country, outside official buildings and big hotels. They are emblazoned with the word kwibuka, meaning “to remember”, and the slogan of this year’s theme, “remember, unite, renew”. “Sometimes during the commemoration, the young people listen to how the genocide happened, to the consequences, and then they say ‘this is the time to tell the truth’,” he said. The Rwandan genocide was the mass slaughter by members of the majority Hutu ethnic group of those belonging to the Tutsi minority. Between April 7 and mid-July 1994, as many as 1 million people were killed. The genocide only ended after the Rwandan Patriotic Front, led by Paul Kagame, assumed power in the country. Kagame remains in power today. In Gahoromani two weeks ago, locals laid out the bones on a shaded sheet. The remains of their clothes were hung on a line, so friends and family members could identify victims. This would be followed by a dignified burial at one of the over 200 designated memorial sites across the country. With the passing of time, these grim discoveries had become fewer, Ahishakiye said. It is still not known how many people were killed in those 100 days. He said there were still people who believed in the “genocide ideology”, but this was made punishable by prison 10 years ago. “This is the reason why, 24 years later, we are still finding bodies. There are those who are still denying, who don’t want to tell us the truth about the genocide,” he said. Human Rights Watch has, however, previously criticised the Rwandan government for applying the “genocide ideology” law broadly to prosecute government critics and to criminalise free speech. Thierry-Kevin Gatete is a senior research fellow for the Institute for Policy Analysis and Research in Rwanda and a well-known political blogger. His research on a microfinance project in two villages showed the importance of closure for development. “In one village it was good, in the other it was total chaos,” he said. The project worked in the village where many mass graves had been uncovered and where residents had dealt with their past. However, it failed in the other village because people there refused to confess to murders and those victims that survived still clung to the past. “This group wasn’t aspirational; nobody trusted anybody,” he said. Gatete said he had participated in Gacaca community courts and had seen first-hand how relieved people were when they found where the remains of a loved one were buried. “The survivor becomes a different person,” he said. “Nothing is more important in this country th an uncovering mass graves.”