Jan Venter, the man who withdrew his application for a protection order against Deputy President David Mabuza, appears to have got himself out of one hole and dug himself into another. Forensic investigator Paul O’Sullivan has vowed to force him to finish what he started, saying: “What these criminals do not realise is that I have the goods on them and will send them to prison. You can quote me on that.” Venter ran to O’Sullivan for help to investigate and lay charges against Mabuza about two weeks ago after claiming that Mabuza personally threatened him with death. O’Sullivan took Venter’s statement and evidence, which he wanted to give to the Hawks, to investigate and charge Mabuza for allegedly paying him to lie in court during a R10 million defamation suit Mabuza instituted against his nemesis, Mathews Phosa. Venter told O’Sullivan by email that he was no longer comfortable applying for the order. On May 18 he wrote: “After a lot of thought on my part ... Please stop all investigations. I am not going to and I am not willing to carry on with anything anymore. I have had enough and will carry on with my own life. I am not interested in political or any issues for that matter.” Venter told O’Sullivan the past few years had been traumatic and stressful. “I will not be available for comments or any further discussions in this matter and will let a lawyer of my choice to handle any queries.” But O’Sullivan was having none of it, responding on May 18: “It doesn’t work like that Jan. “We are in possession of an original sworn statement from you, in which you have admitted your role in a multitude of very serious criminal offences. We also have your bank statements, which you voluntarily gave us and they corroborate a lot of what you have said. You will now stick to what you have stated under oath or face investigation yourself,” O’Sullivan said. O’Sullivan told Venter his interview was recorded and reminded him that he offered him his computer password so he could forensically examine it. “We have wasted much valuable time and resources, putting the case together and the work is nearly completed. You will now stick to your intended line, or face the music. It would be ironic if it is you that ends up in jail, but that cannot be ruled out as a distinct possibility,” O’Sullivan warned. Venter’s lawyer, Ulrich Roux, emailed O’Sullivan warning him to stop contacting Venter, to which O’Sullivan responded: “Nice one Ulrich. Who’s paying you? As of last week Venter did not even have money to put petrol in his car. Now he can afford a respectable attorney like you. Regardless, it’s a rearguard action and will not stop me from taking the necessary steps to see that justice is served to those that are deserving of it.” Venter accused Ian Small-Smith, Mabuza’s attorney, of lying to him: “I withdrew this protection order because Small-Smith promised to resolve our differences but he didn’t. I’ve been lied to again.” Small-Smith confirmed he had a labour dispute with Venter who he employed but fired for dishonesty and other reasons. “In front of the mediator, he made various disclosures including who put him up to bring the protection order. This is the kind of guy who will tell me a story and tell you a different story,” Small-Smith said. Mabuza’s spokesperson, Thamsanqa Ngwenya, said Venter’s protection order was “another futile attempt” to tarnish Mabuza’s name. “Once again as happened before, this person has proven himself to be an opportunist seeking attention with no regard for the truth.” 