The office of the Auditor-General in KwaZulu-Natal has stopped auditing the books of eThekwini Metro, and has removed its staff from the council, after receiving a series of death threats. Ntombifuthi Mhlongo, the Auditor-General’s business executive in KwaZulu-Natal conveyed the message to eThekwini’s political and executive management in a letter on Monday. In the letter, Mhlongo told acting city manager Phillip Sithole that: “With reference to my teleconversation of this afternoon, please be advised that the audit team has been removed from the eThekwini audit with immediate effect, as the safety of the team has been compromised. We hereby request an urgent meeting on Wednesday or Thursday this week, to discuss the way forward on how the accounting officer will ensure the safety of the team.” “In the interim, kindly inform the municipal public accounts committee and audit committee of the matter as discussed and note the Auditor-General South Africa will not be in a position to attend to any further meetings until this matter is resolved,” she wrote. A senior eThekwini executive who saw the letter said a number of officials attached to the Auditor-General’s office in the province, deployed to the council, had received death threats after requesting certain documents from the city integrity and investigations unit and the supply chain department. “They were told to stop requesting documents from city integrity and investigations unit and the supply chain departments. They were threatened with death. Some of them told said they received anonymous calls from people telling them that they know where they stay and where their kids go to school.” The meeting requested by Mhlongo, the official said, happened yesterday where she insisted that she was withdrawing her staff auditing eThekwini’s books. The implication, she said, was that “if the Auditor-General can no longer audit our books means that we will have to be placed under administration. eThekwini’s spokesperson, Mandla Nsele, said he was not aware of the letter. “But I will seek clarity from the city manager and revert back to you.” The Auditor-General’s spokesperson, Africa Boso, had not responded by the time of publishing. The office of the Auditor-General submitted a report to Parliament about threats made against Makwetu’s staff members by auditees. This was revealed by ANC MP Vincent Smith at a media briefing during the release of audit outcomes of municipalities for the 2016-17 financial year in Parliament on Wednesday. Smith said this was revealing, after Parliament amended the Auditor-General’s Act to give Makwetu powers to refer irregular expenditure to the Hawks and other law enforcement agencies for investigation. – additional reporting by Msindisi Fengu