ANC national executive committee member Senzo Mchunu says there is no longer any doubt that political killings in KwaZulu-Natal are as a result of ructions within the party. “I no longer have any doubt that these killings are from contestation and problems within the ANC. “This crisis requires leaders of the ANC, from all levels, to come together and confront it head on. We can no longer beat around the bush,” the former KwaZulu-Natal chairman told City Press on Friday. This comes after another series of killings as regional conferences are convened ahead of a much-anticipated provincial conference – which had been set down for this past weekend. The regions, which have been characterised by killings – mostly drive-by shootings – are yet to have their conferences. They include Moses Mabhida, Harry Gwala and the Lower South Coast regions. Mchunu warned against moving ahead with regional conferences (and ultimately the provincial conference) while the divided province is dogged by challenges. The province has seen a showdown between warring factions divided along the lines of those who supported Sihle Zikalala at the 2015 provincial conference (later nullified by the Pietermaritzburg High Court) and those who backed Mchunu. Zikalala won and championed Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s campaign for ANC president, while those who backed Mchunu in the main supported President Cyril Ramaphosa. “No one said conferences must not take place. What we are saying is when we go to conference, we must go as the ANC, not as factions and not divided. “If there are outstanding issues then there should not be a conference. It does not help to go to conference when we are not all on the same page. “We need to go to conferences united, with everyone getting along. No one must be shut out or sidelined for speaking out. A conference that happens in that kind of environment will take us forward,” Mchunu said. Lower South Coast regional secretary Mzwandile Mkhwanazi said the region was not yet in a position to convene its regional conference. Last week Sifiso Cele, an ANC member from the region, was gunned down. Mkhwanazi said members fear for their lives and many are constantly intimidated. “We have encouraged our members to take notes and report any acts of intimidation, so we know if something happens to them, there were signs. “We are meeting with leaders from national on Monday [tomorrow]. They will guide us as to whether it is wise to proceed with conference. “You must remember that we were one of the regions the national working committee had flagged for violence being a threat to our conference,” Mkhwanazi said. The secretary also raised concern about a suspect in the killing of Cele. He said it was the same person who confessed to killing ANC youth league member Wandile Mkhize in 2012, but was later released when he told the court that he had been forced to confess. Ramaphosa and other ANC officials visited KwaZulu-Natal last Monday. Lamenting the killings, the president said the scourge was a national concern and called on law enforcement agencies to do their work.