The Economic Freedom Fighters leaders have singled out Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan as being responsible for allegations that the party benefited financially from the embattled VBS Mutual Bank. This came after claims that EFF deputy president Floyd Shivambu received R10 million from VBS Mutual Bank through his brother, Brian. A damning forensic report into VBS released last week showed that Brian received more than R16 million from the bank. The EFF also urged President Cyril Ramaphosa not to allow Gordhan to capture him. EFF leader Julius Malema warned that Ramaphosa was going to make many mistakes if he listened to Gordhan. “The most dangerous man here is Pravin Gordhan. He fights very dirty. The rogue unit is still in operation. Pravin thinks we are scared of him,” Malema told journalists at a media briefing in Braamfontein, Johannesburg, today. He said the EFF was aware that “Gordhan’s group” was behind the attacks on the party and added that his “rogue unit” broke into Shivambu’s house and listened to conversations. “They listen to phones of people the same way the Guptas did. The most dangerous man here is Pravin Gordhan,” Malema said. According to Malema, the intention behind the EFF attacks was to weaken the party and ensure that it lost support in next year’s general elections. “Why say Floyd received R10 million? He brought his financial statements. We looked at his financial statements. We can’t locate any money from VBS,” he said. However, Malema said the EFF would not take action against Shivambu based on “apparently”. “If Floyd has stolen money he will be punished accordingly. We are not afraid of Floyd really ... we want to act. Brian worked for the EFF. One of his roles was to sell merchandise of the EFF. Let there be prima facie evidence,” he said. Malema said there was a money exchange between Shivambu and Brian as brothers. At the same press briefing, Shivambu denied that he received R10 million from VBS. “There has never been R10 million that came into my account. The bank that I bank with will have called me to come and explain. Siblings relate on a variety of issues. I am not involved in my younger brother’s business,” Shivambu said.