Two reports allegedly being kept under wraps by the council of the Film and Publication Board (FPB) have raised red flags about serious risks to the state classifier by its human resources (HR) and governance units. And numerous sources, some close to council as well as current and former senior staffers, have told City Press they believe that “a cabal” has “captured” council for years now and is to blame for a floundering FPB, one of whose duties is to classify the content of any film or video game before it can be released in South Africa. They also accuse the council of aiding an exodus of senior staffers by interfering with management’s operations, of not fielding best-suited candidates for its chief executive position and of fixating on overseas trips. Blame for the state of the FPB must be placed squarely at the feet of council chair Thoko Mpumlwana, they say. Mpumlwana, who has been on the council for almost 20 years, is serving an unprecedented third five-year term as council chair. Staff at the FPB have also sent a letter to Communications Minister Nomvula Mokonyane making similar claims. But FPB communications boss Lynette Kamineth has systematically denied all of these allegations and insisted the FPB follows its governing act to the letter and has not been found wanting by the Auditor-General. THE ALARMING FINDINGS The two reports, which were obtained by City Press, fear the FPB is opening itself up to irregularities through porous systems and a lack of compliance. The first report is dated March this year and FPB staff as well as members of Parliament’s communications portfolio committee say it is being kept quiet. Kamineth denies this and insists the outcomes of the report are being implemented and that “disciplinary hearings are in progress”. The internal audit report on the FPB’s governance unit doesn’t mince its words: “There is huge risk in the FPB with regard to governance.” The report exposes a lack of skills and capacity, a problem with proper documentation of council minutes and a failure to provide an active register of council resolutions. Sources fear council could avoid accountability this way. The report states that the unit, headed by the company secretary, “does not have standard operating procedures. Actually, this appears to be an endemic problem within the FPB ...” It also points to ineffective management and a “silo mentality” where “people are interested in their own goals, but not that of the FPB”. The second report is an investigation into payroll processes, commissioned from auditing firm SNG Grant Thornton to discover why staff pay has fluctuated from month to month and why certain staff were not having their medical aid and pension fund contributions deducted. Sources say R578 000 was overpaid in the course of a year and a half. A first draft was completed in November and the final report was issued in August. Staff say they demanded answers from HR, which handles payroll, and the blame was laid at the feet of the taxman. The report, however, gives a “high” overall risk grading to payroll processing, account reconciliations, access rights, audit trails and deductions. The FPB is graded “critical” in terms of inaccurate 13th cheque payments, pension contributions and payroll backup files. Kamineth said the report “was tabled by management in the previous council meeting and management is implementing recommendations. This shows that there is a robust mechanism internally to deal with issues at hand and not shy away from them.” She says that some of the issues do in fact relate to tax and will be dealt with. SENIOR MANAGEMENT FAIL “The board must answer to why their entire senior management structure collapsed after the former chief executive was forced out last year,” one very senior source told City Press in the course of our investigation. The executive in question, Themba Wakashe, resigned amid numerous claims against his character failed to stick despite an investigation that sources claimed cost close to R1 million. He accused the FPB of homophobia, which they vehemently denied. Parliament has repeatedly asked why Wakashe was paid an alleged R2 million golden handshake. “The other executives left at the same time, one for health reasons, but the others because of how they were treated by a council that is steadily interfering with operations, especially in supply chain processes.” said the source. Kamineth said: “With the exception of the chief executive position, which is about to be filled, the executive committee is now fully constituted with qualified and experienced employees.” She denied that council becomes involved in operational matters, that the claims against Wakashe were planted or that council uses certain favoured staff to “spy” on their colleagues. Sources are also alarmed about the filling of the R125 000 a month chief executive position, with claims from two sources that the short-listed candidates failed their competency tests relating to the requirements of the job at hand. “Competency reports are not for public consumption and therefore cannot be shared,” said Kamineth, who did not deny the claim, but instead said: “Three competent candidates have been submitted to the minister for a final decision.” Sources claim that former communications minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane, now science and technology minister, wanted the FPB board to be dissolved, but her media liaison Hlengiwe Nhlabathi said the minister “will not be commenting on matters relating to her previous portfolio”, referring queries to Mokonyane. Communications spokesperson Mlimandlela Ndamase responded to detailed questions with a statement about the chief executive appointment: “A report has been submitted to the minister and, in light of the allegations contained in your questions, a request has been made to the council to submit the full report of the process for the scrutiny and consideration of the minister.” Aside from the Wakashe scandal, the FPB and its appeals tribunal have made headlines in recent years for the effective banning of the films Of Good Report and Inxeba.