Chief Mandla Mandela’s Mvezo Traditional Council has been accused in the AbaThembu’s highest traditional court by a group of his own villagers of stopping them from celebrating a farmers’ day. Nkosi Zwelivelile, as Mandela is known in Mvezo, heads the chieftaincy that was accused in the court – in his absence – after a fallout with local farmers who complained that he stopped them holding a farmers’ day event in the village because he was informed about it too late. Nkosi Thandisizwe Mtirara, the chairman of the committee that heard the case, said judgment would be handed down by acting Thembu king Azenathi Dalindyebo on Thursday. The complainants, sheep farmers and wool producers from Mvezo, claimed that they were chased away by district officials from the Eastern Cape’s department of rural development and agrarian reform who came to help them build a shelter for their sheep. King Azenathi’s uncle and spokesperson, Prince Siganeko Dalindyebo, said they tried on several occasions to bring Mandela to court to respond. Instead he delegated his mother, Nolusapho, who acts as village chief in his absence, because “he is always busy”. Mtirara confirmed that, in their complaint, the villagers raised Mandela’s attempts to shut down their taverns as evidence that he was an unreasonable leader. In 2016, he personally prevented a truck belonging to AB InBev from offloading a consignment of alcohol at a local tavern. Prince Siganeko said the task of the traditional court, which sat at the king’s home, Bumbane Great Place, was to ensure peace and harmony among his subjects. “Our task is to make sure they find each other and come out of the Great Place as friends and resolve their matters amicably.” Mvezo headman Daluxolo Nonkayi confirmed that a group of local wool producers had approached him to intervene. “I know these farmers very well. They came to me and said the chief was refusing to allow them to hold their event on his land. They said their preparations were at advanced stages. "They had already bought groceries and had even slaughtered and were stuck because Zwelivelile simply refused, despite the fact that they had already spent so much money preparing,” he said. Because Mandela is his traditional senior and he couldn’t deal with the matter at his traditional court, he recommended they approach the king. The group of about eight farmers steadfastly refused to comment until next week’s judgment. The group, consisting mainly of elderly men, were at pains to explain that they did not take the matter to Bumbane because they wanted to undermine Mandela or had no respect for him, but because they felt they had no other choice. However, Mandela said he was not aware of any complaint about him at the traditional court, or of any Mvezo farmers with a problem with him. He denied being summoned, saying only his mother was asked to appear. “Is there a case in Bumbane about me? I am not aware. Did they call me to come to Bumbane? There is a letter that was addressed to Mam’ uNolusapho which asks for her and the Mvezo traditional council to come to Bumbane. "They went there twice. I have not been called. I don’t know anything about what you are asking me about,” Mandela said on Friday. “The chief in Mvezo at the moment is Mam’ uNolusapho. I am a member of Parliament. I don’t know what they want. "If there is a case against me and it’s in Bumbane, did anyone call me? I don’t even know who the complainants are because I am not even aware that there is a case.” Nkosikazi Nolusapho could not be reached on her cellphone and repeated requests for comment went unanswered. In a letter dated July 22 addressed to Nkosikazi Nolusapho and copied to headman Nonkayi, acting king Azenathi invites them to a meeting at his palace on August 2. The letter, written on the abaThembu Royal Kingdom letterhead, contains the subject: Isimemo esimalunga nesikhalazo esiphuma kubahlali base Mvezo (invitation to a complaint from the people of Mvezo), and asks Nolusapho to attend with the entire Mvezo traditional council, but makes no mention of Mandela himself.