The complex debate on land ownership in South Africa was thrust into the spotlight by the ANC’s decision in December last year to “pursue expropriation of land without compensation”. It said it would do so “without destabilising the agricultural sector, without endangering food security and without undermining economic growth and job creation”. Since December Parliament has voted to investigate the desirability and modalities of a constitutional change and hundreds of thousands of South Africans have aired their views at public hearings and in written submissions. Many have warned that fiddling with the Constitution’s so-called property clause – which government itself admits has not hindered land reform – will come at great cost without delivering any economic or justice dividend. In response to this, since June, City Press has been running a journalism partnership called Our Land/Ons Grond, in association with Rapport, Landbouweekblad and Code For Africa, which has led to the publication of dozens of in-depth stories told by ordinary South Africans about their relationship to land. Along the way we heard fantastic success stories that could inspire solutions countrywide. City Press and Rapport have organised a land indaba, taking place in Johannesburg on October 3, where decision makers will critically evaluate land reform since 1994 and examine solutions to the political and economic challenges that we, as a nation, face.  The indaba will be co-hosted by City Press editor Mondli Makhanya and Rapport editor Waldimar Pelser. Speakers include former president Kgalema Motlanthe, AgriSA’s Dan Kriek, advocate Tembeka Ngcukaitobi, Nick Serfontein of Sernick Group, professor Peter Delius, Chief Livhuwani Matsila and agricultural economist Wandile Sihlobo from the Agricultural Business Chamber. It will conclude with a debate between political parties and a networking session. Makhanya said: “Unfortunately, the land debate has tended to be divisive and polarising. Through the Our Land/Ons Grond project, City Press and Rapport are seeking to enrich this important debate through strong research, reportage and commentary. “This summit forms part of the initiative. “Through it we hope to contribute to creating a climate in which an honest and constructive conversation can be had on an issue crucial to South Africa’s food security and development, as well as to the war on poverty and inequality.” Joining the panel for The Politics of Land debate are Ronald Lamola from the ANC, Dali Mpofu from the Economic Freedom Fighters, the DA’s Solly Malatsi, the United Democratic Movement’s Bantu Holomisa and Mosiuoa Lekota from Cope. Sihlobo will set the stage for the debate with his presentation on the future of food production. 