The ANC staged a march to the offices of Mayor Herman Mashaba, Premier David Makhura and Eskom in Johannesburg on Friday to hand over memorandums demanding service delivery. Joined by the South African Communist Party, the Congress of South African Trade Unions and the South African National Civic Organisation, the ANC marched against electricity cut-offs, demanded better housing and that the City of Joburg provide free basic water. Fees Must Fall activist Mcebo Dlamini also joined the marched and called for the ANC to restore the dignity of black people. “The time for black people to be happy in South Africa and to walk with pride and dignity has arrived. The time to deal with poverty has arrived. Poverty is very painful; if you are a parent and you don’t have money, you know the pain of poverty. "The time to restore the dignity of a black man has arrived. The ANC has a role to restore the dignity of black people in South Africa,” Dlamini said. Gauteng education MEC Panyaza Lesufi, who accepted the memorandum on behalf of the Gauteng Premier’s office, reflected on the recent Westbury protests and the grievances of other coloured communities and said that skin colour should not be a factor in delivering services to people. “Services should be rendered to everyone regardless of the colour of their skin. Whatever we do as the ANC we must not allow pride or race to supersede the need to build a non-racial South Africa. We will attend to all those issues as long as services are delivered to all our people,” Lesufi said. ANC regional chair Geoff Makhubo said that they were raising grievances with both the provincial and local government and asking them to improve the lives of people so that they could sustain themselves. “We want them to expedite service delivery in the form of housing delivery. There is a high cost of living and people are struggling under the state of the economy. "We want to say to the premier that we’ve raised issues about Johannesburg, around corruption and administration, we want [Makhura] to investigate all the allegations surrounding the administration and corruption in the city,” he said. 