Messages of condolences for Hip Hop Pantsula (HHP), real name Jabulani Tsambo aka Jabba, have started pouring in since the tragic news broke that he has been found dead. Celebrities and fans have expressed their heartbreak over the 38-year-old’s passing and his family has reportedly confirmed his death but not how he died. But it was no secret that the artist who pioneered Setswana rap struggled with depression throughout his luminous life. We called up some South African artists who were close to the King of Motswako. DJ Oskido – Godfather of kwaito, producer, deejay, Kalawa Jazmee co-founder “I met him on Thursday when he was at Metro FM, heading to do an interview with Thomas. We spoke and when we said goodbye he said, ‘No, we’re gonna meet at the studio.’ I didn’t know he was saying goodbye. He was at Kalawa often, he was always working a lot with Mandla Spikiri. Actually even now he’s on Spikiri’s new album that’s coming. HHP loved that old school kwaito sound. He loved it. But he also broke new ground; he was different. He was the king of Motswako, the face of Motswako. The first to say, ‘Listen, I’m gonna do this in Setswana’ when all the others were rapping in Nguni [isiZulu and isiXhosa]. He took great pride in his language and culture, in Mahikeng, taking from the streets he knew and making it mainstream. He was the first to go live, with a live band, a female bassist even, I remember it well. He was a game-changer in the hip-hop scene. Just a year ago he was on my radio show talking about his war with depression. He spoke about how he had tried to commit suicide three times, but even so I was hoping that he was better. Even right now I can’t believe it.” Thembi Seete – Former Boom Shaka star, TV host, actress and businesswoman “It is painful, it’s scary ... You know I cannot believe it, it is just so messed up. I have known this guy for such a long time, from Mahikeng days; we frequented there a lot as Boom Shaka. He was a young boy who always wanted to be in the industry. He was outspoken, not even shy. We have lost a very amazing artist once again. If it’s true that he had depression, I feel like it’s something we don’t talk about, we do not discuss it. Maybe it’s the way we were raised, we do not know much about it. I think it’s time we dig deep and find out what is this depression thing because we go through so much and we never say anything about the stuff and challenges we go through.”  Zwai Bala – Former TKZee star, musician, producer and businessman “I am still shocked. I knew Jabu from when he was still at school, I had a little set-up in Randburg where I started TKZee and he came to see me with a school friend of his. They played me some beats, they were school kids who were rapping – that is the first time I met him. He appreciated keeping it real, especially in the hip-hop arena – I call it an arena because there is a lot of competition and focus on things like what cars people drive. Jabu was extremely intelligent … He loved and he respected what he gave to his audience. It was not just about him, but his own growth.” Dj Cleo – Deejay, producer, artist and businessman “We go back to tertiary, I did sound engineering and he did film production. We stayed at the same residence. I did his demo of one of the songs, which was later released on his first album. Funny enough that was the first and the last time I ever worked with him. He was the funniest person to be around. He was also random, he only spoke to you when he felt like it. I could never find him when I wanted him … and then when he calls he’ll want to speak for 10 hours.” Twitter responds to HHP's death:  Had I known that we were chatting for the last time I would have stayed on the line for long. But we were setting up a meeting for Tomm (THURS) for a further brotherly session ?????? #RipJabba #RipHHP #RIPjabulani pic.twitter.com/QHifHkbWIi  Jabba was like a dad to me ???? the only one that believed in me, even when I didn’t believe in myself. ?????? I’m outta words. Rest well Black James Bond #RIPJABBA #RIPHHP pic.twitter.com/VwJNLMBPV3  ???????????? depression kills ladies and gents. Let's always check up on those we know and care about. Be kind to each other, you don't know what the other is going through. #RIPHHP Jabulani Tsambo2018 must just end already. #RIPJabba #RIPJABULANITSAMBO pic.twitter.com/hWaJkSH7vc  Shaken to the core. This life man. This life. Playing Lefatshe Je, kana that album ya YBA to NW would be blaring in my first car, until the CD gave up. Ao Jabba banna ???? #RIPHHP  Reason, HHP and I made a song called Endurance. It was about conquering adversity and coming out better on the other side. I hold it dear because the message is so necessary. What a tragedy. Condolences to his loved ones ??? #RIPHHP  I'm GUTTED. I went to high school with Jabs. I listened to him sing in the choir. We went to rugby training. I was around for Verbal Assassins. The last time I saw him we chatted candidly and he sounded happy and optimistic. My heart is sore ???? #RIPHHP A talent has been taken.  Sad sad https://t.co/xl60arEhqp hard to believe that Jabba is gone. Life is a struggle. It’s precious and fleeting. Death is a reminder to live fully, to yield to love’s ways and be a blessing to others. It was an honour to know you. Rest In Peace Jabulani. #RIPHHP  It’s deeply saddening to hear of the passing of Jabulani Tsambo. Our music industry lost a hero whose music touched lives. My condolences to the Tsambo family, friends and music family. May #HHP’s legacy be an inspiration and bring comfort to the loved ones he left behind#RIPHHP pic.twitter.com/AlSeZLEU92  - Compiled by Lerato Morotolo