Duduzane Zuma’ culpable homicide case has been postponed to January next year. Zuma – accompanied by his father, former president Jacob Zuma – made a brief appearance in the Randburg Magistrates’ Court on Friday. He faces two charges of culpable homicide and one count of negligent driving. The charges relate to an accident that occurred in February 2014, when Zuma crashed into a taxi after losing control of his Porsche on the Grayston Drive off-ramp on the M1 north of Johannesburg, The incident resulted in the deaths of Phumzile Dube and Nanki Mashaba. But Zuma’s court appearance was dominated by events outside the courtroom. His outspoken supporters from the Black First Land First movement were out in full force with their leader Andile Mngxitama, toyi-toying and calling for all charges against the Zuma father and son to be dropped. Mngxitama argued that the charges were racially motivated and meant to tannish the Zuma’s image. He referred to the fact that, in July 2014, the state withdrew charges due to “insufficient evidence”. The charges were only reinstated after lobby group AfriForum announced its intention to privately prosecute Zuma, “We must remember why we are here; we are here because AfriForum is fighting Jacob Zuma’s declaration that land must be returned back to us. This is the only reason why he and his son are being dragged through the mud. “This young man [Duduzane Zuma] was also involved in the accident. He also could have died so the death of other people in this accident must not be used by the enemies of black people to fight their own battles,” said Mngxitama. The firecracker Mngxitama also reiterated that his organisation would stand in support with the Zuma father and son. BLF members and individuals wearing Democratic Alliance regalia clashed outside the court as the DA members chanted “down with corruption”. The mood changed drastically when the young Zuma stepped outside the court room. Female DA supporters rushed to have their photos taken with Zuma and even engaged in conversations with him. The case was previously postponed in August to allow the defence time to review the docket against Zuma. Prior to that, the matter was postponed in July for the disclosure of inquest proceedings and the content of the docket.