MUSIC: Stogie T, Nasty C and Riky Rik released some interesting images to accompany their latest releases. Phumlani S Langa reviews  King of a new wave? Artist: Nasty C Track: King . . .  - - Nasty C has spent quite a bit of time overseas since his album dropped as well as his new and lucrative deal. This track features one of Harlem’s front running rappers at the moment, the eccentric A$AP Ferg. The video also features a decent looking haircut as Nasty rolls around in a Benz wagon. Some of the usual elements have been included: street shots outside the corner store and a group of guys mobbing on a rooftop. The scene in the G Wagon, with Nasty C’s quirky bopping to the beat, reminds me a bit of Ludacris or Big Boi. Beyond that, it isn’t all that memorable.      The bosses’ table Artist: Stogie T featuring Kwesta, Maggz and J Molley Track: Pretty Flowers . . . .  - This was an interesting watch and a rather tasteful presentation for the lead single from his Honey and Pain EP. This cinematic offering sees Stogie host a banquet for his alliance of bars, namely Kwesta and Maggz. For a touch of that wavy feel the kids love, J Molley wrestles with the Autotune over the hook which, as it happens, is my favourite appearance by this guy. The three veterans sit at a table, dressed in suits and smoking jackets, flanked by models who look like they’re from Sandton. They puff cigars and make toasts like this is Jay Z’s Roc Boys. J Molley appears to be waiting on them, the young lord who is yet to be invited to the table. Soon he spikes the cognac at the table though, rendering the three bosses incoherent. J Molley then finds himself at the table with all the amenities of the game spread out before him. The story played out in the video seems to represent the state of the game right now, where we’re seeing this pull between old and new trains of thought.  Riky’s riot Artist: Riky RickTrack: I can’tbelieve it (Macoins) . . . . . Adriaan Louw is hands down the best music video director we have in it. He’s consistent and has yet again provided his razor sharp storytelling technique and accompanied it with a track that is one of Riky’s better records. This beat builds gradually, urging you to get as buck as the images you see on screen. I found that Louw’s images overwhelm Riky’s ability with the pen, but the latter’s cocky prowess behind the mic makes up for it. The texture and grading of this video are remarkable, and I imagine this was shot on film – a classy touch. The wardrobe looks like it’s straight from the 80s. Watching this music video was like watching an episode of Velaphi – if Velaphi was the head of a street gang in a Stanley Kubrick creation.