After working for student accommodation business South Point for 14 years, Queen* says she still goes home with an inconsistent R3 400 to R3 600 at the end of the month. “It differs from month to month. Before we were in-sourced in 2005 by Supercare we used to earn a little bit more. Then South Point took us back in 2006, but our salaries are not the same even if we do the same job. “When we ask them [South Point] why our salaries differ they don’t tell us, but say these are cleaning rates,” said Queen. After a four-week wage negotiation the workers at South Point feel defeated, but are desperate to return to work in time to pay next months’ rent and debt. The workers have been involved in a month-long protected strike after wage negotiations deadlocked. South Point is a private company that started in 2003 to provide student accommodation and offices in five provinces. Queen, a single mother of two, says she is struggling to make ends meet with her meagre salary. “I mean, what can you do with R3 000? I have loans and kids that need to be sent to school and I still have to travel daily from Berea. It is really tough. I try and balance it out, but after 15 years in this company I only get a bonus in December and the work we do is strenuous.” Last month the workers downed tools, demanding an R8 500 minimum wage; R1 500 housing allowance; a provident fund; industrial medical aid; one day’s paid leave for medical check-up; a long-term demand to end outsourcing; payment for overtime; a 13th cheque instead of a bonus; the end of the capital labour brokering system; and implementation of long service awards, beginning with R5 000 for five-year service. However, it seems wages are not the only problem at South Point, but also the treatment of workers, says Queen. Luka Thomo, who works as a front desk officer at South Point, has six mouths to feed and earns R4 700. He is unhappy with the outcome of the negotiations, but is desperate to feed his family. “I am a married man with five kids and I can’t maintain my family with this R4 000,” said Thomo. “I have to pay school fees for my kids and the last born is in crèche, and it’s very expensive. Most of us have to borrow money from loan sharks immediately after getting paid and we are suffering as a result of this. "In South Africa everything is expensive. From the R4 700 I get, I spend R3 000 on groceries, R1 000 on transport and I’m left with R 700 before I even talk about school fees, uniforms and any possibility to save money. “It’s difficult. This company is just thinking for itself, they don’t care about the workers. They underpay us and don’t give us provident funds and they also don’t want us to belong to unions. After joining a union they started to outsource certain duties because they don’t want unions.” He said the workers negotiated from June until August when the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration issued the union with a certificate of strike. However, he alleged the company hired bouncers and instructed them to assault the striking workers. He also alleged nepotism was rife in the company. “There are qualified artisans who earn around R4 800, yet some who are not qualified earn far more than them. That’s not fair.” South Point’s chief executive, Ndumiso Davidson, said they were happy they had reached a settlement with the workers. “We have agreed on a minimum wage of R22 per hour; the implementation of a company-wide provident fund from March, bonuses; and a peace clause [so that] workers who have contravened the picketing rules and/or the company’s disciplinary code will not be dismissed subject to certain conditions,” he said. *Not her real name