Does Kessie Nair, who called President Cyril Ramaphosa the K-Word, have a mental disorder? This was at the heart of the case on Monday, as the former convict’s mental stability was in the spotlight as his family tried to convince Magistrate Ncumisa Gcolotela that he “wasn’t of sound mind”. Nair is charged with six counts of crimen injuria and two counts of incitement and instigation charges after he posted the video in which he insulted the president on Facebook. On Monday, Nair appeared for his formal bail hearing. He had said in the video, which went viral, that he was prepared to go to Westville Prison for his rant. His family, however, has claimed that he had a mental disorder, and that they have in the past urged him to get medical attention. Speaking outside the Verulam Magistrates’ Court on Monday, where Nair appeared for his bail application, his brother Krishnan told the media that Kessie had in the past denied his mental state. “If you tell somebody that they are not of sound mind, they are going to dispute that and deny that, which he had done. He had refused family members asking him, requesting him to seek medical attention,” Krishnan said. When cross-examined by his brother’s attorney, Chris Gounden, about whether he been coerced into saying that his brother was mentally unstable to avoid the charges, Krishnan denied the allegations and labelled it as “rubbish”. Last week he took to Facebook, where the family released a statement, attributing Nair’s racial slurs to his mental condition. “His health took a turn for the worst a few years ago. He suffers a serious chronic illness. The visuals he posted of himself shows he lacks the intelligence and understating of what he is saying. His incarceration for a long time has also played a role in his personality. Kessie needs immediate medical care and attention. He is physically and mentally unwell,” the statement read. The affidavits submitted by family members led to Nair being referred for mental observation last week. According to the district surgeon who examined him, Nair was “delusional”. Last week, while appearing in court on Thursday, Nair had issued an apology to South Africa for his racist slur, and he called on the nation to forgive him. “The remarks that I made on video which I posted – there would have been different alternatives that I could’ve utilised, but using the K-word obviously brought about the emotional aspect,” he said. But his racist slur was all that was needed for the South African Human Rights Commission to get involved. The commission condemned his remarks and instituted an investigation into the matter by its KwaZulu-Natal provincial office. “The commission views these utterances in a gravely serious light as these increasing utterances, particularly spread via social media, are divisive, damage social cohesion as well as the promotion of human rights. The commission continues to act on its mandate as set out in section 184 of the Constitution, in its efforts to end the social scourge of racism and racist utterances.” His brother gave evidence on Monday. He said that Nair, who was released from prison in 2009, had showed signs of mental instability and that his family was informed that he needed help. Nair, who once held the position of a Durban councillor, had served a sentence for fraud. He had also claimed that he was a member of the notorious 26s gang. Warrant Officer Ajay Lutchnan, who was investigating the case, told the court that investigations were at an advanced stage. He said there were about 10 outstanding statements in the matter. When Gounden asked him whether Ramaphosa had made a statement the state objected before Lutchnan could answer. Gcolotela also said she could not allow the question. The case continues. – Additional reporting by News24