Sultry pop star Lungi Naidoo says she is ready to take a break from music. This week, the singer-songwriter opened up to City Press about the challenges she has faced because of men abusing their power in the industry. “It is sad that it has become the norm for women to give sexual favours to men if they want to grow in their careers. As women, we are suffering because of patriarchy – it is the biggest problem in our industry,” said the talented artist. For legal reasons, Naidoo has opted not to name and shame the culprits. “It has been a rough journey for the past few months,” said the emotional Afro-soul and dance music vocalist. Several music insiders told City Press this week that Naidoo’s career was suffering because she had resolutely refused to open her legs for men offering fame. One of the concerned sources alleged the musician’s last straw was a recent trip to Nigeria: “She confided in me that when she had a collaboration with Nigerian artist Idyl in Nigeria in April, a record label executive asked for sexual favours, but she refused. Little did she know that it was career suicide, because after that trip they made her life even more miserable.” Another insider added: “I have seen Lungi frustrated, crying hysterically at the Universal Music offices, begging for petrol money, and men would take advantage of that and they would want sex advances from her.” When these accounts were put to her, Naidoo said she had heard them before, then added: “I did not open a sexual harassment case against anyone.” She would neither deny nor confirm the allegations – all she would say was that she was going to tell her story one day, at the right time. The Away With Me hitmaker would also not comment on claims that she is desperate to leave record label Universal. The men implicated did not respond to questions emailed to them by City Press on Thursday. However, Michelle Green, Universal’s legal and business affairs officer, responded via email with this statement: “Universal Music Group takes these allegations very seriously and is carrying out an investigation.” After more than a decade on the mic, Naidoo worked with renowned deejay Black Coffee on her latest offering, Black Diamond, but started out doing backing vocals for Loyiso Bala and the late Lebo Mathosa. She said that for now, she was dealing with her pain in her own way and had decided to go back to her roots in KwaMaphumulo, KwaZulu-Natal, to find herself again. “I just want a break from everything. This industry can drive you insane. Even if I have to quit the music industry, I am ready to do so. I have had enough,” she said. The insiders City Press spoke to agreed that Naidoo is not unique, that female artists are sexually harassed on a daily basis and most are too afraid to come out for fear of having to give up on their dreams. “Once you speak out, you become a target and the key industry players will block your music and make sure you don’t receive airplay. So, most women end up selling their souls and sleeping their way to the top out of desperation,” they said. Naidoo told City Press that she grew up listening to the likes of Whitney Houston, Brenda Fassie and Tsakani “TK” Mhinga. Now, looking at how their careers ended, her biggest fear was that she would end up in the same boat. Naidoo is not the only artist who spoke up this week. New kid on the block – singer, songwriter, dancer and actress Yolanda Ruiters, known as Yasirah Bhelz to her fans – agreed it’s not easy to be a female artist. She said she had also been asked for sexual favours by several men who were big players in the music industry. “I was told if I want stardom, the only quick way to succeed was to sleep my way to the top. But I never felt the need to do so because I believe my music is good enough and my talent, it speaks for itself.” TALK TO US Have you ever been asked for sexual favours to advance your career? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword FAVOURS and tell us what happened. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material.