The South African chapter of the Brics Business Council – comprising officials from Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa – has rid itself of all its members and is in the process of appointing new ones. Trade and Industry Minister Rob Davies sent letters to each of the five council members, informing them that the body was being dissolved and would be reconstituted. The letters, copies of which City Press has seen, were sent to the council’s outgoing chairperson Iqbal Survé, who is also executive chair of the private equity firm Sekunjalo Group, as well as to Black Business Council chairperson Sello Rasethaba, Industrial Development Corporation chairperson Busisiwe Mabuza, axed Transnet CEO Siyabonga Gama and Aspen Pharmacare senior executive Stavros Nicolaou. The department confirmed that the council was dissolved, saying the decision was taken after a recommendation by organised business. It said a new, reconstituted structure would be more representative and be driven mainly by business. “The decision to reconstitute the Brics Business Council was taken by consensus and collective agreement between organised business, the outgoing chair of the Brics Business Council and the minister of trade and industry through engagements that took place before the Brics Summit of July 2018,” said departmental spokesperson Bongani Lukhele. “Organised business made the recommendation for the reconstitution of the council to ensure that organised business spearheads the council nominations and initiatives going forward, while maintaining alignment with national policy imperatives. “Minister Davies, as the custodian of the council, procedurally issues letters of appointment to council members. The minister will continue to appoint council members going forward, based on the recommendation of candidates put forward by organised business collectively. Council members that have previously served on the council are not excluded from being nominated to the council by organised business.” Lukhele said business had been tasked with proposing new candidates for the council.   