Nhlanhla Nene fell on his sword last week, resigning from the finance ministry and from his role as an ANC member of Parliament. The ANC caucus on Friday confirmed that the former finance minister had tendered his resignation as a member of Parliament on the same day (October 9) that he resigned as finance minister. ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu explained that: “In a letter received by my office today [Friday, dated October 9], Comrade Nene has indicated that he is submitting his resignation as an MP following his decision to step down as finance minister.” In his letter, Nene indicated that his resignation as MP was effective from last Tuesday. “I take this opportunity to thank you for the working relationship we have had during my tenure as a member of Parliament,” Nene wrote to Mthembu. “I am also indebted to the ANC and the people of South Africa for having given me the opportunity to serve our country in my capacity as an elected representative,” Nene continued. Mthembu thanked Nene for his service to the ANC and South Africans. He added that there were very few people who were able to own up to their error of judgment. “Comrade Nene is among the few,” Mthembu said. Nene left the finance ministry last week following his testimony at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into state capture at which he backtracked on previous remarks about having had meetings with the Guptas only in social settings. Nene’s revised testimony revealed that he had met the controversial brothers several times between 2009 and 2014 at their residential apartment and their offices. Following pressure after his testimony and the allegations that his son, Siyabonga Nene, and his wife had also benefited from Public Investment Corporation funding while he was chair of the organisation, Nene handed in his resignation, leading to President Cyril Ramaphosa’s appointment of Tito Mboweni as finance minister. Mthembu also congratulated Mboweni on his appointment and said he looked forward to him delivering the medium-term budget policy statement on Tuesday. 