Uncertainty and confusion reign over the coronation of amaMpondo aseNyandeni King Mangaliso “Ndluvuyezwe” Ndamase, amid last-minute secret meetings held to avoid an embarrassing court challenge to interdict the event. A group of amaMpondo in the east, also known as amaMpondo aseQaukeni under King Zanozuko Sigcau, insist that there is only one legitimate amaMpondo king and are determined to interdict the government’s involvement in the coronation. But others are desperate to avoid embarrassment at the event, which takes place on Wednesday. President Cyril Ramaphosa is set to attend the coronation, where he will hand over a certificate of recognition to Ndamase if it goes ahead. Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini is also expected to attend The coronation was announced by the ministry of cooperative governance and traditional affairs in August. It was billed as the second coronation of “a king since the dawn of democracy”. But a group supporting Sigcau wanted to interdict government’s participation in the event, saying it was legitimising Ndamase, who was not a king. Meetings were held between the two kings this week to try to iron out their differences. This week, lawyer Julie Mohamed, who represents Sigcau’s supporters, confirmed she drafted papers and was awaiting instructions from her clients. “Our papers are ready to be filed, but it looks like there were some deliberations,” she said. “People from our side and the side of Ndamase and government are still locked in those negotiations; we don’t know what the outcomes of that will be.” Last week, Sigcau’s spokesperson Prince Maraqana said the monarch was the only king of amaMpondo. “We are not intending to interdict their coronation as amaMpondo aseNyandeni. We will interdict the president. The president cannot crown or issue a certificate of recognition to a person who is not recognised or determined as king by the Nhlapo commission [the commission looking into traditional leadership disputes and claims],” said Maraqana. “The commission says clearly and unambiguously that Nyandeni does not have a kingship. “The kingship rests with the House of Mqikela – that is, the house which Zanozuko Sigcau belongs to. Even the Constitutional Court recently confirmed what the Nhlapo commission determined.” Maraqana said those in Nyandeni were their younger brothers and they had no problem with them “having a feast and eating meat and doing whatever”. “But we are objecting to the president going there saying he is crowning a king ... of Nyandeni. We don’t have two kings here. We have one king,” he said. Maraqana could not be reached for comment after last-minute negotiations had been held. Nkosi Ntandoyeziswe Ndamase, King Ndamase’s brother, was confident that the coronation would go ahead as planned, saying the issues were resolved. “We met with King Zanozuko [Sigcau] on Wednesday and we were chatting about the preparations,” he said, adding that “unity” had been “achieved by amaMpondo” and King Ndamase was “happy”. Nkosi Ntandoyeziswe said they were looking at slaughtering about 20 cattle at Nyandeni Great Place. By Friday, government was still mum about whether the coronation would take place. Eastern Cape government spokesperson Sonwabo Mbananga said that they had received updates on preparations and interactions between government and both amaMpondo royal families. “But I am not going to disclose what those discussions entail, except to say that the government is satisfied by the preparations leading up to the coronation,” he said. “I can also tell you that one of the high-profile dignitaries who can be expected at the coronation is Zulu King Zwelithini. It is a full participation by government, provincially and nationally.” Ramaphosa’s spokesperson, Khusela Sangoni, could not be reached for comment.