Moves are afoot in Limpopo to recall three mayors for not toeing the party line. The mayors facing the chop are Polokwane Local Municipality Mayor Thembi Nkadimeng, Thulamela Mayor Avhashoni Tshifhango and Collins Chabane Municipality Mayor Joyce Bila. The plan to remove the mayors is being spearheaded by some leaders from the Peter Mokaba and Vhembe regions. The two regions have submitted their recommendations to ANC provincial executive committee (PEC) officials. City Press has learnt that top ANC officials in the province are still processing the matter and are expected to announce a decision within two weeks. Nkadimeng is set to be replaced by Capricorn District Mayor and Peter Mokaba regional chairperson John Mpe, while Thulamela Local Municipality speaker Humbulani Mulovhedzi will take over from Tshifhango. Vhembe deputy secretary Moses Maluleke is tipped as a possible mayor to replace Bila. ANC leaders told City Press this week that the mayors failed to attend party election campaigns to woo voters ahead of next year’s general elections and two of them did not back the province resolution to support President Cyril Ramaphosa ahead of the ANC’s national elective conference in December. A Peter Mokaba region leader said Nkadimeng dug her own political grave by defying her ANC principals in the province when she challenged Mpe for the position of Peter Mokaba regional chairperson two months ago. She was defeated by Mpe at the regional conference that was held in July. Nkadimeng stands accused of dishing out lucrative tenders to the Economic Freedom Fighters, the ANC’s rival. Although Nkadimeng would be removed as the mayor, she would not be unemployed as the ANC provincial leaders plan to send her to the provincial legislature or National Assembly after next year’s general elections. ANC provincial secretary Soviet Lekganyane said once the PEC receives the recommendations it will go through them. “If the two regions have met, we will consider the merit of the report,” he said. Lekganyane said the PEC has done an assessment on the state of the ANC, local government and election work. “It was a comprehensive report,” he said. He said the report looked at whether municipalities are able to appoint qualified people and provide services to communities. Mpe confirmed this week that the Peter Mokaba regional executive committee had resolved at its meeting last weekend that Nkadimeng should be redeployed. “We have made a recommendation to the PEC officials to consider the restructuring of the Polokwane Municipality [political management team]. We have to dispel certain suggestions that there is a purge. We are talking facts,” Mpe said. He cited poor service delivery, the financial position of the municipality, failure to empower local communities and emerging contractors as some of the reasons the two regions want Nkadimeng to be recalled. “Rural communities have protested about water. I stay in a village and there is no water. There is no water in Polokwane. "The people in rural areas form stronghold support of the ANC. Leadership must inspire confidence within communities they are deployed to serve,” Mpe said. Vhembe regional chairperson Tshitereke Matibe said the region was not targeting any mayor. “We had a general discussion. In the discussion, we said if there are challenges what can we do to assist the deployee?” Matibe said. However, Tshifhango sung a different tune, saying: “The information I have is that the region has taken that decision to remove me. "They went to the PEC to make a presentation on Monday. The PEC has dismissed them. They told them we are busy with elections.” ANC Youth League secretary Che Selane said the mother body has not engaged the league on plans to sack the mayors. “The ANC has not engaged with us. These are just rumours. What I know is that everyone is focusing on elections,” Selane said. Nkadimeng and Bila could not be reached for comment.