Chief Mandla Mandela’s mother, Nolusapho, has been told not to allow her son to “sow confusion” and create two centres of power in Mvezo in the Eastern Cape. So said abaThembu King Azenathi Dalindyebo last week, in a verdict handed down in a traditional court case brought by wool growers in the village Mandela is chief of. When Mandela, an ANC MP, is in Parliament, his mother acts in his absence. But when he returns almost every weekend, he exercises “veto powers”. The wool growers brought the case after Mandela cancelled a farmers’ day event because he was told about it late. The traditional court’s secretary, Nceba Nkosiyane, said the farmers had three main complaints: the farmers’ day event, Mandela’s closure of a local tavern that was too close to a school, and that no new sites for residents were being demarcated in Mvezo. The first complaint could not be adjudicated because Mandela wasn’t there to offer his side of the story, and King Dalindyebo found in acting chief Nolusapho’s favour on the other two complaints. The king told the wool growers to return to Mvezo and try to work in harmony with the Mvezo traditional authority. Nkosiyane said: “But what the king told Mam’ uNolusapho was that, as the registered head of the traditional council in Mvezo, there should not be two centres of power. [He told her] not to allow a situation where [Mandela] comes back from Parliament and becomes a chief for two days. “The king feels that creates a lot of confusion among the people of Mvezo and that it was up to Mam’ uNolusapho to fix this,” he said. “If Mam’ uNolusapho is the head of that traditional council, she must be given all the powers so that if things go wrong, we know the buck stops with her.” He said the king did not “find any fault against acting chief Nolusapho or Nkosi Zwelivelile”, but wanted to promote peace and harmony among the people of Mvezo. The wool growers refused to comment. Nolusapho said: “It is true that the king advised me that I could consult with Nkosi Zwelivelile when he is around and that there are things I don’t understand. The king said everything must be done through me. That is all that the king said.” She said everyone was happy with the king’s “fair and sound” decision. “People should know that I am the one who is in charge in Mvezo,” she said, adding that her son didn’t exercise any veto. “I make my own decisions. There is nothing like that. There should be no confusion.” Mandela declined to comment.