Democratic Alliance chief whip Shaun August has resigned in support of embattled mayor Patricia de Lille. His resignation was soon followed by four more resignations by DA councillors; Siya Mamkeli, Suzette Little, Greg Bernado and Thulani van der Stemela. During an ongoing sitting of the City of Cape Town’s council this morning, August announced that he had tendered his resignation as chief whip of the governing party. He added that he was also resigning as a councillor in the city and also that he was no longer a DA member. August who was a member of De Lille’s former party the Independent Democrats, which merged with the DA in 2010, walked over to give the mayor a hug before leaving the council chambers. “My decision does not come lightly considering the two years of struggle, discrimination and double standards that I have been subjected to by the DA,” August said in a statement. August also refers to a “war,” which has been playing itself out in the metro where he claims that there have been attempts to, “cleanse,” the DA of former ID members. “Since being elected as the chief whip in the City, my term has been mired with concocted accusations, federal legal commission appearances and mudslinging in the media and within the DA metro caucus. In a deliberate attempt to discredit and assassinate my character, I was subjected to 12 charges against me in one year, many of which were withdrawn due to lack of evidence. “To date, I still await factual proof, an apology or a retraction from those who were nameless, faceless and even from those who have publicly assassinated my character.” August says that himself and other supporters of the DA in the council have been subjected to insults and intimidation but have stood form, refusing to vote in favour of the motion of no confidence. De Lille’s future hangs in the balance as she waits to hear whether or not council will adopt a damning report against her. The report compiled by Bowman Gilfillan was to establish if disciplinary action was to be taken against one or more of Cape Town’s senior managers. Having brokered a settlement with DA leader Mmusi Maimane, the Bowman report, which was leaked, has informed De Lille’s U-turn on the matter. The mayor is adamant that she will not resign but will choose to stay on in her position and undergo a disciplinary process until her name is cleared. The DA, who have already announced Dan Plato as her successor, may then opt to attempt yet another motion of no confidence, to remove her.