Albertina Sisulu’s exemplary life is celebrated in a memoir that captures her ‘essence’. Sindiwe Magona is one of South Africa’s literary treasures. This inspiring woman has led a life that has seen her transition from being a domestic worker to a writer and graduate, holding a master’s degree in social work from Columbia University. She had the privilege of writing a biography on the woman many consider to be the unsung Mother of the Nation: Albertina Sisulu. The 72-year-old strolls into the restaurant area at the Holiday Inn in Rosebank, smiling. Small in stature but a strong presence, Mam’ Magona is dressed all in black with a red doek, and doesn’t shake hands – preferring to give me a warm hug. She explains what it was like to work on a new biography, titled Albertina Sisulu, which she wrote in collaboration with Sisulu’s daughter-in-law, Elinor Sisulu. “The book is an abridged version of the larger biography that Elinor did,” she says. “Elinor, who is a joy, asked me to help her split the book in such a way that there is a standalone Albertina and Walter.” Magona helped capture the lives of the two anti-apartheid giants in a shorter offering and also translated the initial book into isiXhosa. She said the process was intimidating as she had never worked on a abridged book before. “I love biography. To understand a story and the history of a nation is amazing. A good biography captures the essence of a person’s life and gives you an accurate idea of the era.” Magona adds that this is why she enjoyed studying history. The Eastern Cape-born acclaimed writer is in town to celebrate the centenary of the birth of Albertina Sisulu and participate in a panel discussion, as part of a series of events organised to pay tribute to the struggle stalwart. Magona gets more comfortable in her chair before revealing some of the things this biography helped her uncover about Sisulu. “She wasn’t political, but she was aware. Can you imagine studying to be a nurse and your mum dies, and you’re not allowed to go to your mother’s funeral?” She leans back in the chair, shocked. “The white matron tells her: ‘If you go, you will not be accepted back.’ The matron then asks Albertina if she was planning on bringing her mother back to life. Can you imagine such a dilemma?” The difficult thing is that the passing of Sisulu’s mother meant that she found herself – the oldest of eight girls – the head of her family, with siblings to fend for. “She thought of her siblings and her father’s dying request, telling her to look after the family. But she swallowed the tears and she stayed. That is a woman who knew how to nyamezela [endure],” says Magona. “We can learn from her resilience. Humans are made to transcend and not succumb. That is the lesson I learnt from her life.” Magona, who has been lauded for using her pen as a weapon of activism, suggests that South Africa’s current leadership should take Sisulu’s example and step away from self-glorification. “Mama Sisulu just did the work. She was all about her people and their suffering – that’s it. “What I admire most about her is how steadfast she was. There were no zigzags in her life. She was unwavering; she would never nurture and then destroy. Mama Sisulu was someone with a deep-seated sense of right and wrong.” 