Mandla Makupula, the Eastern Cape education MEC has died after a long illness. Premier Phumulo Masualle’s spokesperson, Sizwe Kupelo, confirmed that the MEC died in the early hours of Monday morning. “The Eastern Cape premier and the entire provincial government is saddened by the death of MEC for education, Mandla Makupula. He died in an East London hospital in the early hours of today [Monday],” said Kupelo. Makupula presided over a struggling portfolio for years, staying steadfast in his resolve to try and make a difference to the lives of pupils who didn’t have enough schools or teachers to ensure they did well at school. In 2017, when under fire for the Eastern Cape being at the bottom of the matric class of 2016, he told City Press that the problems were systemic, and even if he was to step down, it wouldn’t solve the problem. He blamed the legacy of the homeland system for the situation. “You can change a man or an individual but without addressing the problems in the system you won’t make a difference. People must appreciate that the organisation is complex and for years it was slack. I am not bragging, but since 1994 this department has received a disclaimer in audit opinion up to 2012.” He said that for two or three consecutive years his department had achieved unqualified audits and it was working at achieving a clean audit. He added that he was working on a turn-around strategy, which included hiring mentors for principals and focusing on the five worst performing districts in the province. “I don’t believe removing Makupula is the answer but at the same time I don’t want to be seen to be fighting to stay on the job,” he said in his own defence. And his efforts did seem to be paying off. Although not one of the top-performing provinces, last year’s Eastern Cape matrics recorded a 65% pass rate for 2017 – marking a 5.7% increase from the 59.3% pass rate in 2016. Kupelo said Makupula had served the people of the Eastern Cape with integrity and ethical leadership. “On behalf of the executive council and the entire provincial government, the premier expresses his heartfelt condolences to friends, colleagues and family of the late MEC,” said Kupelo. Details of the funeral would be announced in due course.