It’s been a turbulent few days for the ministry of finance – from its boss testifying that he effectively lied, to a new boss who is an old hand when it comes to big money matters. And in between it all is a president who had to weather political pressure from the opposition, the public and his own party. City Press political editor Rapule Tabane, breaks it all down for us.  Nene’s breaking point In the first part of his analysis, Tabane takes a look at how former finance minister Nhlanhla Nene got himself into the situation that led to his ultimate resignation. From his early comments about the limited face time with the Gupta brothers to his testimony at the state capture inquiry to the his subsequent apology, Tabane takes us through all that Nene was and why it was important – and even commendable – that he resigned from his position. Time: 00:00 to 05:36 How Ramaphosa handled it President Cyril Ramaphosa had been silent since his former finance minister’s testimony, all through the hype, the political threats and even the rumours of Nene asking to relieved of his duties. When Ramaphosa finally took to the podium on Tuesday afternoon the horse had bolted, but instead of playing to the rumour mill he mad a clean and decisive step – even if it was not of his own hand. Tabane looks at Ramphosa’s role as well as his public demeanour during this tricky period, stating that he handled it very well. Time: 05:45 to 08:26 Is Tito the right man? Tabane deals with a the questions around Tito Mboweni’s credentials, perception and tweeting that has come under scrutiny since he was appointed as head of the national coffer. Is he the right man for the job? Will he keep to his Twitter promises? Is he not just part of the old guard in this new dawn? Tabane tackles these questions head on, but believes he is a good and stable choice for minister of finance. Time: 08:30 to 12:29 Finance ministers’ musical chairs to continue? With yet another finance minister, South Africa seems to be changing – and recycling them – like it’s good for the environmental well-being of Earth. This perceived instability in one of the most important Cabinet positions is not helping South Africa’s already-fragile economy. Tabane acknowledges this but is hopeful that since the dawn of Ramaphosa’s presidency he’s been meticulous in reshuffling his Cabinet and that this measured approach will restore confidence in the ministry’s highest seat. Time: 13:55 to 14:40